http://www.diva-portal.org



Postprint


This is the accepted version of a paper presented at ICMS 2014: 4th International Congress of
Mathematical Software, Seoul, South Korea, August 5-9, 2014.



   Citation for the original published paper:

   Duracz, J., Farjudian, A., Konečný, M., Taha, W. (2014)
   Function Interval Arithmetic.
   In: Hoon Hong & Chee Yap (ed.), Mathematical software -- ICMS 2014: 4th International
   Congress, Seoul, South Korea, August 5-9, 2014. Proceedings (pp. 677-684). Berlin, Heidelberg:
   Springer
   Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
   and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)
   http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-44199-2_101




N.B. When citing this work, cite the original published paper.




Permanent link to this version:
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:hh:diva-27146
                          Function Interval Arithmetic

             Jan Duracz1 , Amin Farjudian2 , Michal Konečný3 , and Walid Taha4
                                        1
                                        jan@duracz.net,
                                    http://duracz.net/jan
             2
                 School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham Ningbo, China,
                             Amin.Farjudian@nottingham.edu.cn,
                                   www.cs.nott.ac.uk/~avf
      3
           School of Engineering and Applied Science, Aston University, Birmingham, UK,
                                   M.Konecny@aston.ac.uk,
                             www-users.aston.ac.uk/~konecnym
             4
                 Halmstadt University, Sweden & Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA,
                                        Walid.Taha@hh.se,
                                      http://bit.ly/WT-EMG


          Abstract. We propose an arithmetic of function intervals as a basis for conve-
          nient rigorous numerical computation. Function intervals can be used as math-
          ematical objects in their own right or as enclosures of functions over the reals.
          We present two areas of application of function interval arithmetic and associ-
          ated software that implements the arithmetic: (1) Validated ordinary differential
          equation solving using the AERN library and within the Acumen hybrid system
          modeling tool. (2) Numerical theorem proving using the PolyPaver prover.

          Keywords: Validated Numeric Computation, ODEs, Theorem Proving



1   Background

In validated numerical computation, all values are computed together with rigorous
upper bounds on their errors or uncertainty. Applications of this approach range from
pure mathematics to the development of safety-critical systems.
Using more conventional methods, one can achieve such level of reliability by a com-
bination of: (1) Approximate numerical computation based on floating-point numbers;
(2) a specification of error bounds and a formal proof that the implementation of the
algorithm stays within the bounds. While the conventional approach is appropriate in
many applications, a formally proved numerical analysis can easily become too com-
plex. Validated numerical computation often offers a viable alternative in such cases.
Keeping the derived error bounds relatively small is essential. We are interested in meth-
ods that support reducing the bounds arbitrarily close to their theoretical limits.

Interval computation. It is impossible to represent all real numbers or functions in finite
space. Computation over these objects is realizable only through computation over their
2         Duracz-Farjudian-Konečný-Taha

valid finite representations. For the purposes of validated computation, the most widely
used approach is to represent a real number by an interval with floating-point endpoints
that enclose the real number, bounding it from below and from above.
A driving force behind the development of interval computation has been a number of
notable applications to rigorous differential equation solving, global optimization, and
theorem proving. In the past couple of decades these application areas have also been
combined in the construction of rigorous algorithms for reachability analysis of dynam-
ical systems. A famous example of such advances is Tucker’s proof that the Lorenz
attractor is a strange attractor [Tuc02]. Interval computation has gained more recogni-
tion since the formation of the IEEE Interval Standard Working Group P1788 in 2008.
Interval computations use and produce enclosures of numerical quantities and functions.
In their simplest form, such enclosures are just real intervals, most often used to bound
single real values. Cartesian products of real intervals are interval vectors, or boxes. A
box can be used to approximate a single real vector, a geometric entity, or a part of a
function graph. Our focus is the approximation of functions, using enclosures that are
more refined than boxes.
Function intervals are intervals whose endpoints are functions and can serve as enclo-
sures of functions in the same way that real intervals can serve as enclosures of numbers.
More formally, a function interval is a pair [ f (x1 , . . . , xn ), g(x1 , . . . , xn )] where f and g
belong to the set D → R of real-valued functions on a box domain D ⊂ Rn . A function
interval [ f, g] is typically used to enclose a single continuous function h in D → R—
i. e., f ≤ h ≤ g—and its accuracy increases as its width —i. e., ||g − f ||∞ —decreases.
Established special cases of function intervals include Berz and Makino’s Taylor Mod-
els (TMs) [MB02] and affine forms [CS93]. Arithmetics of TMs and affine forms have
been used with considerable success to bound rounding errors in floating-point com-
putations [DK14a] and to approximate the solutions of differential equations in beam
physics simulations [MB09]. Our implementation of function intervals is more general
than TMs and affine forms.


2     Functionality

The AERN library5 formally defines functional interval arithmetic as an algebraic struc-
ture over function intervals and provides an implementation based on polynomials. The
algebraic structure includes the following operations:

    – constructors: constant functions, such as 0, π, [0, 1], projections, such as λ(x, y).x
    – pointwise operations:
                   √          the field operations +, −, ∗, /, common elementary functions
      such as e x , x, minimum, maximum andR absolute value
                                                    x
    – analytic operations: integration, such as 0 f (ξ, y) dξ
    – domain-changing operations: evaluation (e. g., f (1), f ([0, 1])),
      composition (e. g., f (g(1, x), x)), adding a variable (e. g., f (x) 7→ f (x, y)),
      restricting the domain of a variable (e. g., f (x, y)| x∈[0,1] )
 5
     AERN is freely available from https://github.com/michalkonecny/aern
                                                         Function Interval Arithmetic          3


          2




          1




          00            1             2

      Fig. 1: Enclosures of erf(x) computed      Fig. 2: The product [−1, 1] · x, its outer
      by AERN with various effort settings        and inner approximations by AERN


Most of these operations can be computed only approximately, producing enclosures of
the exact results. Each approximate operation has an optional parameter that gives the
user control over the trade-off between computation effort and accuracy. For example,
consider the task of approximating the error function
                                              Z x
                                          2          2
                                erf(x) = √        e−t dt                           (1)
                                           π 0

over the domain x ∈ [0, 2]. In our implementation of this function using AERN6 , the
following parameters are available to control the approximation effort:

 – The precision of polynomial coefficients and constants such as π
 – An upper bound on the polynomial degree
 – The Taylor degree for approximating e x

Fig. 1 shows the enclosures of the error function computed by AERN for several settings
of the above effort parameters. The only parameter that changes is the upper bound on
the polynomial degree and it ranges from 5 to 25.
Defaults are available for these effort parameters. There is also an iRRAM-style [Mül01]
adaptive mode, in which the user specifies the desired accuracy of the result and the li-
brary adaptively increases effort parameters until the accuracy is reached.
AERN provides facilities to approximate not only real functions but also real interval
functions, such as the product

                            [−1, 1] · x = [min(−x, x), max(−x, x)] .                          (2)

When approximating such intervals, it is often not sufficient to provide an enclosure. For
example, to prove 0 ∈ [−ε, ε]+[−1, 1]· x, it is useful to compute an inner approximation
of the right-hand-side interval function. If the inner approximation contains 0, so will
 6
     The code is available at https://github.com/michalkonecny/aern/blob/master/
     aern-poly-plot-gtk/demos/erf.hs
4       Duracz-Farjudian-Konečný-Taha

the exact function. Fig. 2 shows an outer and an inner approximation of the function (2)
computed within AERN7 . Near x = 0 the plotted inner enclosure is slightly inverted.
Adding [−ε, ε] turns the enclosure into a consistent function interval containing 0.


3    Applications

We demonstrate the practical utility of function interval arithmetic via three concrete
applications in computational mathematics.

Solving ODE IVPs. The arithmetic was used to compute enclosures for solutions of or-
dinary differential equation initial value problems (ODE IVPs) by means of a direct im-
plementation of the interval Picard operator of Edalat and Pattinson [EP07]. Moreover,
function interval arithmetic provides a conceptually simple way of extending Edalat and
Pattinson’s work to the case of uncertain initial conditions. Fig. 3 shows a parametric
plot of an enclosure produced by AERN for the following Lorenz IVP with an uncertain
initial value:

            y1 = 10(y2 − y1 )     y02 = y1 (28 − y3 ) − y2 y03 = y1 y2 − 8y3 /3
            0
           
           
                                                                                    (3)
            y(0) ∈ (15 ± 0.01, 15 ± 0.01, 36 ± 0.01)
           

Note that the rectangular initial value uncertainty results in a non-rectangular interme-
diate value uncertainty as time progresses. The short elongated shapes visible in Fig. 3
are enclosures of the uncertainty sets for sample time points.

Enclosing Zeno behavior. A restricted version of function interval arithmetic and our
ODE solving method are included in the Acumen8 tool for modeling and rigorous sim-
ulation of hybrid dynamical systems. In combination with a novel method for event
processing [KTD+ 13], the Acumen tool can compute a tight enclosure of a trajectory
that contains infinitely many events due to so-called Zeno behavior. An example of such
enclosure is shown in Fig. 4.

Automated theorem proving. The arithmetic has been used to automatically prove theo-
rems that take the form of inclusions of non-linear interval expressions, such as:
                                                              !        Z x
      2   0.3480242         0.0958798          0.7478556           2          2
1−e x                  −                  +                     ∈  √       e−t dt±0.00005
        1 + 0.47047x (1 + 0.47047x)2 (1 + 0.47047x)3                 π 0
                                                                                      (4)
A version of AERN has been embedded in our numerical theorem prover PolyPaver9 .
PolyPaver proves such inclusions by constructing an outer approximation of the con-
tained function and an inner approximation of the containing interval function and show-
ing that the inclusion holds for the approximations. (Fig. 2 gives an example of an inner
 7
   The code is available at https://github.com/michalkonecny/aern/blob/master/
   aern-poly-plot-gtk/demos/thickprod.hs
 8
   Freely available from www.acumen-language.org
 9
   Freely available from www.github.com/michalkonecny/polypaver
                                                       Function Interval Arithmetic       5

                                                         5

                                                         4

                                                         3




                                                     x
                                                         2

                                                         1

                                                         0
                                                             0   1      2       3
                                                                     Time


     Fig. 3: An AERN enclosure of all             Fig. 4: An Acumen enclosure of a
      solutions of the Lorenz IVP (3)          trajectory with Zeno behavior at time 3


approximation.) PolyPaver has been successfully applied to proving correctness theo-
rems for tight accuracy properties of floating-point programs [DK14b]. For example,
we proved that a Riemann integrator produces a value close to the exact integral.


4   Underlying theory

In this section we first give an overview of the main types available in the AERN li-
brary, and then explain why these types feature a generalized notion of interval. This is
followed by a description of the role of abstract types in specifying and checking the
reliability of our implementation. Finally, we highlight some aspects of Domain Theory,
which inspires and models the essence of our approach to approximating real numbers,
intervals and functions.

Types. The main types provided by the AERN library and their relationships within
and outside AERN are outlined in Fig. 5. Specifically, there are two abstract types, one
defining an algebraic structure of approximations to the real numbers and intervals and
the other one defining a structure of approximations to continuous real functions and
function intervals. The former is implemented by a floating-point interval arithmetic
and the latter is implemented by a polynomial interval arithmetic.

Generalized intervals. The two algebraic structures are closely linked to the continuous
lattice of generalized real intervals. A generalized interval (sometimes called directed
or modal interval) [Kau80] is a pair [c, d] with no requirement that c ≤ d. If c > d,
the interval has no canonical set interpretation. The lattice is ordered by the refinement
relation, denoted v and defined as follows:

                         [a, b] v [c, d] ⇐⇒ (a ≤ c and d ≤ b)                           (5)

If c ≤ d, then the relation v can be intuitively interpreted as “[a, b] contains less infor-
mation than [c, d]”. The intuition is that the more points an approximating set has, the
6       Duracz-Farjudian-Konečný-Taha




                  Fig. 5: Main abstract and concrete types in AERN.



less it is saying about the location of the approximated object. We consider inconsistent
intervals, i. e., intervals [c, d] where c  d because an inner approximation of a normal
interval can lead to the bounds of the interval crossing. This happens, for example, near
point 0 in Fig. 2 and also when approximating π when proving inclusion (4).


Properties. The abstract types are formalized in the Haskell programming language
using its type class feature. A type class is somewhat similar to an interface in object-
oriented languages. It facilitates the specification of operations and their signatures.
Moreover, AERN also specifies a comprehensive list of algebraic laws that each im-
plementation of the type class should satisfy. For example, one of these laws is the
commutativity of addition, modified as follows to suit approximate operations:

                                  (x ‹+› y) v (y ›+‹ x)                               (6)

where ‹+› and ›+‹ produce outer and inner approximations of the exact sum, respec-
tively. AERN randomly generates thousands of tests for dozens of such properties using
the Haskell QuickCheck library, giving the implementation a very thorough check.


Domain Theory. One of the strongest features of interval-based frameworks is their
solid theoretical foundation. In particular, we rely on the rich theory of continuous lat-
tices and continuous partial orders [GHK+ 03], which possess useful order-theoretic,
algebraic, and topological properties.
The types in Fig 5 implement an algebraic structure on the set of generalized real and
function intervals. The operations are all isotonic with respect to the refinement rela-
tion v, which facilitates reasoning about soundness and convergence of the resulting
algorithm implementations.
One of the most important properties of continuous lattices is that they form a Cartesian-
closed category. This means that the function spaces in the category are also continuous
lattices and we can use the rich mathematical theory of such lattices over the function
spaces as well.
                                                        Function Interval Arithmetic       7

For example, take the space of continuous generalized interval functions. To approx-
imate elements of this space in software, a countable basis is required. The set Bbox
of “box approximations”—i. e., piece-wise constant interval functions that have finitely
many “steps” and rational coordinates—is a suitable basis for this space.
Nonetheless, from a practical point of view, the basis Bbox is far from ideal. For example,
to enclose a linear function y(x) = a0 + a1 x with accuracy ≤ 2−n , one generally needs
O(2n ) boxes, while a more succinct representation could be devised, such as the pair
(a0 , a1 ). A similar argument can be made√ using a quadratic function approximated by
affine intervals except that one needs O( 2n ) intervals to get accuracy ≤ 2−n . The trade-
off between space and accuracy improves with increasing polynomial degree.
The above observation suggests that polynomial approximations provide a more practi-
cal basis for enclosing functions than Bbox . This view is also supported by the result that,
using a specific polynomial approximation, the ODE IVP y0 (x) = f (x), y(0) = 0 can be
solved in polynomial time if f is a polynomial-time computable real function [MM93].


5   Technical contribution

A number of challenges in developing AERN have been related to polynomial approx-
imation of various operations. Perhaps surprisingly, the most complex operation to im-
plement was multiplication. A multiplication of generalized intervals was first intro-
duced by Warmus [War56], but the v-isotonic version that we have adapted was given
by Kaucher [Kau80]. The operation is defined in 16 cases, distinguished by the signs
of the endpoints of the two interval operands. The challenge is that when the operands
are function intervals, the sign of their endpoints may be changing at different places
over the domain of their variables. Thus an arbitrary subset of the 16 cases can arise
for one pair of functions. This problem is solved in AERN by merging the formulas for
the results in all cases that cannot be ruled out using pointwise min and max. Two of
Kaucher’s 16 original cases also contain min and max in the formulas.
The challenge of implementing pointwise approximate min and max for polynomials
has been addressed by a combination of Bernstein approximation and domain transla-
tion. The degree of Bernstein approximation used for min and max is one of the effort
parameters for any expression that includes multiplication. The enclosures of the prod-
uct in Fig. 2 have been computed with the use of pointwise min and max.
Almost all polynomial operations have the potential of exceeding the maximum degree
and maximum term size limits. To approximate a polynomial by another with lower
degree or fewer terms, some terms are carefully eliminated. The version of AERN used
in PolyPaver uses the Chebyshev basis to reduce the loss of accuracy due to degree
reductions. We plan to port this feature to the main AERN library.
Another challenge was implementing random generation of floating-point intervals and
polynomial intervals required for randomized testing of algebraic properties. The gener-
ation in AERN produces a distribution of intervals that contains singletons, consistent
non-singletons and anti-consistent non-singletons with equal probability. Moreover, spe-
cial values such as 0 and 1 are generated with a relatively high probability.
                                Bibliography


    [CS93] João L. D. Comba and J. Stolfi. Affine arithmetic and its applications to
           computer graphics, October 1993. Presented at SIBGRAPI’93, Recife, PE
           (Brazil).
  [DK14a] Eva Darulova and Viktor Kuncak. Sound compilation of reals. SIGPLAN
           Not., 49(1):235–248, January 2014.
  [DK14b] Jan Duracz and Michal Konečný. Polynomial function intervals for floating-
           point software verification. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelli-
           gence, 70:351–398, 2014.
    [EP07] Abbas Edalat and Dirk Pattinson. A domain-theoretic account of Picard’s
           theorem. LMS Journal of Computation and Mathematics, 10:83–118, 2007.
[GHK+ 03] G. Gierz, K. H. Hofmann, K. Keimel, J. D. Lawson, M. W. Mislove, and
           D. S. Scott. Continuous Lattices and Domains, volume 93 of Encycloedia
           of Mathematics and its Applications. Cambridge University Press, 2003.
   [Kau80] E. Kaucher. Interval analysis in the extended interval space IR. Computing
           Suppl, 2:33–49, 1980.
[KTD+ 13] Michal Konečný, Walid Taha, Jan Duracz, Adam Duracz, and Aaron Ames.
           Enclosing the behavior of a hybrid system up to and beyond a Zeno point,
           pages 120–125. IEEE, 2013.
   [MB02] Kyoko Makino and Martin Berz. New applications of Taylor model meth-
           ods. In Automatic Differentiation of Algorithms: From Simulation to Opti-
           mization, chapter 43, pages 359–364. Springer, 2002.
   [MB09] Kyoko Makino and Martin Berz. Rigorous integration of flows and odes
           using taylor models. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Symbolic
           Numeric Computation, SNC ’09, pages 79–84, New York, NY, USA, 2009.
           ACM.
  [MM93] Norbert Müller and Bernd Moiske. Solving initial value problems in poly-
           nomial time. In Proc. 22 JAIIO - PANEL ’93, Part 2, pages 283–293, 1993.
   [Mül01] Norbert Th. Müller. The iRRAM: Exact arithmetic in C++. In Selected
           Papers from the 4th International Workshop on Computability and Com-
           plexity in Analysis (CCA), volume 2064, pages 222–252. Springer-Verlag,
           2001. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
   [Tuc02] Warwick Tucker. A rigorous ODE solver and Smale’s 14th problem. Foun-
           dations of Computational Mathematics, pages 53–117, 2002.
   [War56] Mieczyslaw Warmus. Calculus of approximations. Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci.
           Cl. III, IV(5):253–259, 1956.
