Logical Methods in Computer Science
Volume 20, Issue 2, 2024, pp. 17:1–17:55                                                                       Submitted        Jun. 08, 2021
https://lmcs.episciences.org/                                                                                  Published        Jun. 24, 2024




        SEMANTICS, SPECIFICATION LOGIC, AND HOARE LOGIC OF
                     EXACT REAL COMPUTATION

         SEWON PARK a , FRANZ BRAUSSE b , PIETER COLLINS c , SUNYOUNG KIM d ,
       MICHAL KONEČNÝ e , GYESIK LEE  f
                                          , NORBERT MÜLLER  g
                                                               , EIKE NEUMANN h ,
                     NORBERT PREINING , AND MARTIN ZIEGLER a
                                       i




   a
        School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
        e-mail address: swelite@kaist.ac.kr, ziegler@kaist.ac.kr


    b
        University of Manchester
        e-mail address: franz.brausse@manchester.ac.uk


    c
        Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands
        e-mail address: pieter.collins@maastrichtuniversity.nl


   d
        Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
        e-mail address: sy831@yonsei.ac.kr


   e
        Aston University, Birmingham, UK
        e-mail address: m.konecny@aston.ac.uk


   f
        Hankyong National University, Anseong, Republic of Korea
        e-mail address: gslee@hknu.ac.kr


   g
        Universität Trier, Trier, Germany
        e-mail address: mueller@uni-trier.de


   h
        Swansea University, Swansea, UK
        e-mail address: neumaef1@gmail.com


    i
        arXiv, Cornell Tech, Komatsu, Japan
        e-mail address: norbert@preining.info




  Key words and phrases: Computable Analysis, Reliable Numerics, Imperative Programming, Turing-
Completeness, Decidability, Hoare Logic, Kleene Logic.



l       LOGICAL METHODS
        IN COMPUTER SCIENCE   DOI:10.46298/LMCS-20(2:17)2024
                                                               © Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler
                                                               ⃝
                                                               CC Creative Commons
17:2   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler           Vol. 20:2




       Abstract. We propose a simple imperative programming language, ERC, that features
       arbitrary real numbers as primitive data type, exactly. Equipped with a denotational
       semantics, ERC provides a formal programming language-theoretic foundation to the
       algorithmic processing of real numbers. In order to capture multi-valuedness, which is
       well-known to be essential to real number computation, we use a Plotkin powerdomain and
       make our programming language semantics computable and complete: all and only real
       functions computable in computable analysis can be realized in ERC. The base programming
       language supports real arithmetic as well as implicit limits; expansions support additional
       primitive operations (such as a user-defined exponential function). By restricting integers
       to Presburger arithmetic and real coercion to the ‘precision’ embedding Z ∋ p 7→ 2p ∈ R, we
       arrive at a first-order theory which we prove to be decidable and model-complete. Based on
       said logic as specification language for preconditions and postconditions, we extend Hoare
       logic to a sound (w.r.t. the denotational semantics) and expressive system for deriving
       correct total correctness specifications. Various examples demonstrate the practicality and
       convenience of our language and the extended Hoare logic.




                                             Contents
   1. Introduction                                                                                          3
   1.1. Related Works                                                                                       3
   1.2. Kleenean-valued Comparison and Nondeterminism                                                       4
   1.3. Main Contributions and Overviews                                                                    5
   2. Preliminaries                                                                                         7
   2.1. Representations and Computable Partial Functions                                                    8
   2.2. Computable Infinite Multi-valued functions                                                         10
   2.3. Computable (Finite) Multi-valued functions and Plotkin Powerdomain                                 10
   3. Formal Syntax and Typing Rules of Exact Real Computation                                             14
   3.1. Syntax                                                                                             14
   3.2. Typing Rules                                                                                       16
   4. Denotational Semantics of Exact Real Computation                                                     18
   4.1. Denotations of Terms                                                                               18
   4.2. Denotations of Commands                                                                            20
   4.3. Denotations of Programs                                                                            22
   5. Programming in Exact Real Computation                                                                23
   5.1. Programming Abbreviations                                                                          24
   5.2. Example Programs                                                                                   26
   5.3. Turing-Completeness                                                                                32
   6. Logic of Exact Real Computation                                                                      37
   6.1. Three-Sorted Structure with Decidable Theory                                                       37
   6.2. Specification Language                                                                             39
   6.3. Hoare Logic                                                                                        41
   7. Example Formal Verification in Exact Real Computation                                                44
   8. Conclusion and Future work                                                                           45
   Acknowledgement                                                                                         46
   References                                                                                              47
   Appendix A. Proof of the Soundness of the Hoare Logic of ERC                                            50
Vol. 20:2                           EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                   17:3




                                      1. Introduction
Real numbers in computable analysis are expressed and manipulated exactly without
rounding errors by using infinite representations [Wei00, PER89]. For example, a real
number x is represented by an infinite sequence of integers ϕn such that |x − ϕn · 2−n | ≤ 2−n
holds for all n. When we have correctly computed a real number x under this framework,
we automatically get access to the real number x via any arbitrarily accurate precision.
This property makes this approach promising for application domains where high-precision
numerical results are required. Several implementations substantiate this approach of
exact real number computation: AERN [KTD+ 13], Ariadne [CGC+ 20], Core2 [YYD+ 10],
Cdar [Bla], iRRAM [Mül01], and realLib [Lam07] to name a few. They provide their own
data types of real numbers to programmers keeping complicated infinite representations
in their back-ends. Abstracting away such details, the programmers can deal with real
numbers as they were abstract algebraic entities closely resembling the classical mathematical
structure of real numbers with the absence of rounding errors. According to this observation,
it is expected that reasoning about programs’ behaviours in this approach becomes more
intuitive; cf. [KMP+ 08, Mel08, BFM09, BM11].
     Imperative programming is a ubiquitous style of expressing computation that is widely
adopted in numerical computations admitting rich theories of precondition-postcondition-
based program verification methodologies [Hoa69, AO19, Rey02, NMB06] and their successful
applications such as [FP13]. Hence, to conveniently achieve provably correct arbitrary
accurate numerical computations, it is desired to extend them with exact real number
computation. To make such an extension rigorous, we first acquire a formal programming
language with exact real computation on which the extended verification methodologies are
based. However, extending an existing formal programming language with exact real number
computation, which is a seemingly simple quest, fails when it is done naı̈vely with the classical
structure of real numbers as it is not identical, though resembles much thanks to exact
operations, the computational structure of real numbers [Her99, Section 3]. For example,
the real number comparison x < y as a binary mapping is only partially computable causing
non-termination when x = y [Wei00, Theorem 4.1.16]. This property makes multi-valued
functions and nondeterminism essential notions in exact real computation [Luc77]. We
explain this in more detail later in Section 1.2.
     The aim of this paper is to devise an imperative programming language ERC for exact
real number computation that correctly deals with the partial and nondeterministic nature
in the following sense. We formalize ERC’s formal domain-theoretic denotational semantics
in such a way that precisely the computable partial real functions and integer multivalued
functions in computable analysis can be defined in ERC. Based on the formal semantics,
we devise a sound Hoare-style logic of ERC specifications. The language ERC is expressive
enough to model core fragments of existing software and simple enough to stand as a
design guideline for future exact real number computation software developments which
wish to adopt the theory developed in this paper. For this purpose, we develop our language
and theory relative to primitive operator extensions such that other frameworks providing
richer sets of primitive operators can still benefit from ERC to analyze their real number
computations.


1.1. Related Works. In terms of formalizing programming languages for exact real number
computation, this paper is deeply influenced by the following related works. Real PCF
17:4   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler   Vol. 20:2




[Esc96] is a pure functional language that is an extension of PCF [Plo77] with real numbers,
computable real number operations, and a parallel conditional construct for nondeterminism.
Its application in expressing integration demonstrated the usefulness of formalizing exact
real number computation [EE00]. In [MRE07], a domain-theoretic denotational semantics
of a variant language is defined but using the Hoare powerdomain which cannot express
termination. There, it is observed that nondeterminism in computable analysis becomes
continuous only with the Hoare powerdomain. In this paper, we avoid the continuity problem
and use the Plotkin powerdomain instead such that we do not need to have a separate tool
for reasoning programs’ termination. Later in Remark 2.5, we discuss more about using a
different powerdomain.
     When we focus on imperative programming languages for exact real number computation,
the Blum-Cucker-Shub-Smale model [BCSS98] aka real RAM [PS85, §1.4] captures real
numbers as algebraic structure: It supposes tests as total, and renders transcendental
functions uncomputable. The feasible real RAM [BH98] is a computable variant of real RAM
where the infeasible total real comparison test [Bra03] is replaced with a nondeterministic
approximation to it. Its operational semantics influenced the design of iRRAM. Amongst
further related works including [BC90, DGE13, ES14], WhileCC [TZ04], a simple imperative
language extended with the computational structure of real numbers and a (countable)
nondeterminism construct, which is suggested with its algebraic operational semantics, is
close to our design. We proceed from there, suggest a different set of primitives, and further
devise domain-theoretic computable denotational semantics, a specification language, and
reasoning principles.



1.2. Kleenean-valued Comparison and Nondeterminism. An inevitable side-effect of
using infinite representations for exact operations is that the ordinary order relation of real
numbers as a Boolean-valued function becomes partial. Comparing x < y does not terminate
when x = y whichever specific representation is used [Wei00, Theorem 4.1.16]. Instead of
making an entire procedure fail when the same numbers are compared, some frameworks,
including AERN and iRRAM, introduce the concept of Kleenean K := {true, false, unknown},
a lazy extension of Boolean. The third value unknown denotes an explicit state of non-
termination that is delayed until tested. Consider the following Kleenean-valued comparison
                                        
                                        true
                                                     if x < y,
                               x ⋖ y := false         if y < x,                           (1.1)
                                        
                                          unknown otherwise,
                                        

as a replacement for the ordinary Boolean-valued comparison test. When x = y, the
comparison x ⋖ y evaluates to unknown instead of diverging immediately. Though unknown
is an admissible value that can be assigned to Kleenean-typed variables when later it is
required to test if the value is true or false, for example as the condition of a loop statement,
it then causes non-termination.
     A remark worth making here is that the third truth value unknown is only denotational in
the sense that an expression having unknown value cannot be observed during a computation.
Though we can reason that x ⋖ y must be unknown when we know that x = y, we cannot
observe x ⋖ y having its value unknown and conclude x = y. In other words, we cannot
write a program that branches differently on the three values of K.
Vol. 20:2                          EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                  17:5




      Due to the non-termination in comparisons, multi-valued functions and their nondeter-
ministic computations become essential [Luc77] to compose a total but nondeterministic
procedure from possibly non-terminating sub-procedures. Suppose we want to approximate
x < y with a tolerance factor 2−n and consider the two Kleenean-valued comparisons
x ⋖ y + 2−n and y ⋖ x + 2−n . We can test their truths in parallel until one turns out to be
true. Even in the case when one of them is unknown, hence the test faces non-termination,
it is promised that the other comparison evaluates to true. Therefore, the parallel procedure
can terminate safely and inform us if x < y + 2−n or y < x + 2−n . When the two true
conditions overlap y − 2−n < x < y + 2−n it becomes nondeterministic as it will depend
on how the real numbers and the parallel procedure are implemented which we abstract
away. We model this nondeterministic computation by a multi-valued function whose value
is {true, false} at such inputs denoting the set of possible values of the nondeterministic
computation.
      As nondeterminism becomes essential, most exact real computation frameworks provide
their users with various primitive constructs for nondeterminism. In iRRAM, an operator
choose is provided that receives multiple Kleenean expressions and returns the index (counting
from 0) of some expression which evaluates to true. See that the above example can be
expressed by
                            choose(x ⋖ y + 2−n , y ⋖ x + 2−n ) = 0.


1.3. Main Contributions and Overviews. In this paper, we define an imperative pro-
gramming language Exact Real Computation (ERC) providing three primitive data types K,
Z, and R that denote the Kleene three-valued logic K = {true, false, unknown}, the set of
integers Z, and the set of real numbers R, respectively. It is a simple imperative language
with a strict hierarchy posed between its term language and command language where
only the latter contains unbounded loops. Our language is carefully designed to ensure the
computability (in the sense of computable analysis) of its domain-theoretic denotational
semantics by adopting the Kleenean typed comparison ⋖ for real numbers replacing the
ordinary total comparison and offering the nondeterminism construction choose(b0 , b1 , . . .).
We define the denotations of terms and commands to be functions to Plotkin powerdomains
[Plo76] to model nondeterministic computations. The definitions of computable partial
(multi-valued) functions are reviewed in Section 2.
     Construction of limits, which is an essential feature that makes exact real computation
more expressive than algebraic computations [Bra03], is available in a restricted way in ERC.
Instead of introducing an explicit operator for computing limits, which then requires the
language to support constructions of nontrivial infinite sequences within its term language,
ERC supports limits to be computed at the level of “programs”, another layer over commands
representing (multi-valued) functions. A real-valued program is provided with access to
an integer variable p such that when the program computes (possibly multi-valued) 2p
approximations to a real number, the single-valued real number, which is the limit of the
program as p → −∞, becomes the function value that of the program denotes. (A similar
approach of equipping limits can be found in [TZ99, Section 9] and [TZ04, Definition 4.5.1].)
Hence, in ERC, commands compose either an integer program expressing a partial integer
multi-valued function or a real program expressing a partial real function where limit
operations are taken by default. Later in Remark 5.5, we discuss more about this design
choice.
17:6   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler   Vol. 20:2




     ERC is defined relative to primitive operator extensions such that it can be extended
easily to other languages that provide further primitive operators. For each finite sets F of
computable partial real functions and G of computable partial (finite) integer multi-valued
functions, ERC(F, G) is defined. We simply write ERC if the underlying extension sets are
obvious or irrelevant.
     The base language without any extension ERC0 := ERC(∅, ∅) does not provide integer
multiplications or the naı̈ve coercion Z ∋ z 7→ z ∈ R as its term constructs. Instead, it
provides the precision embedding ı : Z ∋ p → 2p ∈ R as a way to convert an integer to
real. Although this looks like a bit of restriction at first glance, since integer multiplication
is expressible using a loop in our command language, we claim that our programming
language itself is still expressive by showing its Turing-completeness in Theorem 5.3 and
various examples in Section 5. This restriction and the strict hierarchy between ERC’s term
language and command language are motivated by the specification language of ERC which
for ERC0 ’s terms is adequate and admits a decidable theory.
     We introduce a first-order language over the three types (sorts) expanded with (F, G)
as the specification language of ERC. We show that the first-order language can define
the semantics of our nondeterministic term language. Moreover, for the default language
ERC0 , whose design is influenced by the structure suggested in [Dri85], the theory of the
specification language becomes model-complete and decidable with regard to the canonical
interpretation. Nonetheless, due to the fundamental trade-off, the specification language for
ERC0 is not expressive enough to define the semantics of the command language.
Remark 1.1. Consider the following three desirable features:
  i) a programming language being Turing-complete over integers, and thus able to realize
     an algorithm whose termination is co-r.e. hard
 ii) a specification language sufficiently rich to express the termination of said algorithm
iii) a sound and complete r.e. deductive system of said specification language.
Obviously, not all three are simultaneously feasible. For instance integer WHILE programs /
Peano arithmetic satisfy (i) / (ii), but not (iii) [Coo78, §6].
     We propose choosing (i) and (iii) over (ii) as the base design aiming for further develop-
ments of automatic reasoning of exact real computations using the decidability property.
However, since our language is defined relative to primitive operator extensions, those who
are not happy with this trade-off can take the other direction by adding, for example, the
integer multiplication or the naı̈ve coercion Z ∋ z 7→ z ∈ R in (F, G). The other parts of
this work remain valid.
     Based on the specification language, we extend the classical Hoare logic for ERC
commands’ total correctness                     
                                           ϕ S ψ
that says for any initial state satisfying the precondition ϕ, all possible executions of
the command S regarding the nondeterminism in ERC terminate and each yields a state
satisfying the postcondition ψ. The precondition and postconditions are formulae in the
specification language. We prove the soundness of the extended Hoare logic with regard
to the denotational semantics. We demonstrate the extended Hoare logic to prove the
correctness of a root-finding program.
     To summarize our main contributions:
• A choice of primitive operations over real numbers and their computable (multi-valued)
  semantics in Section 2.
Vol. 20:2                          EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                  17:7




• A small imperative programming language with three basic data types R, Z, and K, and
   the primitive operations for exact (multi-valued) computations over the algebraic structure
   of R, Z, and K regarding the said semantics in Sections 3 and 4.
• Examples demonstrating programming with these operations and semantics, such as:
   multi-valued integer rounding, determinant via Gaussian elimination with full pivoting
  (subject to full-rank promise), and root-finding in Section 5
• Proof that this programming language is Turing-complete: those and only those real
   functions and integer multi-valued functions that can be realized in ERC are computable
   in the sense of computable analysis in Theorems 4.8 and 5.3.
• A many-sorted structure for the formal specification of ERC whose first-order theory is
   decidable and model-complete in the case of ERC0 in Section 6 and Theorem 6.2.
• An extended Hoare logic to enable formal verification of ERC programs’ behaviours
   including their terminations in Section 6.3 and Theorem 6.11.
• An example correctness proof using the extended Hoare logic of the root-finding example
   program in Section 7.
     This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we review the definitions of computable
partial functions and computable partial multi-valued functions in computable analysis and
the definition of Plotkin powerdomain over flat domains. We specify several computable
partial functions and multi-valued functions that constitute our primitive operators. Section 3
defines the formal definition of our language syntax and typing rules. In Section 4, we
define domain-theoretic denotational semantics using the Plotkin powerdomain and prove
that for any well-typed terms, well-formed commands, and well-typed programs, their
denotations are computable partial multi-valued functions (or partial real functions in the
case of real programs). Section 5 defines some programming abbreviations and introduces
various example programs which are: square root using Heron’s method, exponential function
via Taylor expansion and iterative, integer rounding, matrix determinants via Gaussian
elimination, and root-finding. Later in the section, based on the integer rounding example,
we prove the Turing-completeness of ERC saying that any computable partial real functions
and integer multi-valued functions are realizable in ERC.
     We introduce in Section 6 a three-sorted structure and its first-order language for
specifying nondeterministic programs in ERC. We prove that its first-order theory is
decidable and model-complete in the case of ERC0 . Section 6.3 extends the classical Hoare
logic from Z to (K and) R and prove its soundness. Section 7 demonstrates our verification
method by proving the correctness of the aforementioned tri section program for root finding.
We conclude this work with Section 8 suggesting future research including extending ERC
from operating on real numbers to operating on functions to express operators and other
higher-order data types.


                                     2. Preliminaries
To devise sound mathematical semantics for unbounded loops, we take a traditional domain-
theoretic approach [Rey09, Chapter 2.4] and define the denotations of loops as the least
fixed points of some continuous operators.
     To model nondeterministic computations, we use the Plotkin powerdomain (which
we review later in this section) P(Y⊥ ) on flat domains Y⊥ . An element of the domain
p ∈ P(Y⊥ ) is a subset of Y ∪ {⊥}. Hence, a mapping f : X → P(Y⊥ ), which is a partial
multi-valued function, models a nondeterministic computation whose return values are in
17:8    Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler      Vol. 20:2




Y where f (x) ⊆ Y ∪ {⊥} denotes the set of all possible return values of the computation
at input x. When f (x) contains ⊥, it denotes the case where there is a nondeterministic
branch that fails. In this sense, we say f is partial and defined only at x where ⊥ ̸∈ f (x).
     In this section, we review the definitions of computable partial functions f : X → Y⊥
and computable partial multi-valued functions f : X → P(Y⊥ ). We specify some computable
partial functions and multi-valued functions that later constitute the set of primitive operators
in ERC.
     Instead of defining the computability of domain-theoretic functions by relating them with
the ordinary computability definitions from computable analysis, we define the computability
of functions to flat domains or to powerdomains directly such that we do not have to handle
many different computability notions at the same time. Remark 2.6 may help the readers
who are already familiar with computable analysis to translate the settings back and forth.

2.1. Representations and Computable Partial Functions. For a set X, a representa-
tion δX of it is a partial surjective function from the set of infinite sequences of integers to
X. 1 When δX (φ) = x ∈ X, we say φ ∈ ZN is a δX -name of x. We often omit the prefix
δX if it is obvious from the context or if it is irrelevant.
     We work with the following representations of Z, R, K:
                                      δZ (φ) = k :⇔ φ(n) = k for all n ∈ N,
                                      δR (φ) = x :⇔ |x − φ(n) · 2−n | ≤ 2−n for all n ∈ N,
                 δK (0#0 · · · 0#1#1 · · · ) = true,
           δK (0#0 · · · 0# −1# −1 · · · ) = false,
                     δK (0#0 · · · 0#0 · · · ) = unknown.
Here, a#ϕ when a ∈ Z and ϕ ∈ ZN denotes the infinite sequence where a is prepended to ϕ
as its new head. In a name of some b ∈ K, the digit 0 acts as a token saying that we do not
know yet if b is true or false, the digit 1 acts as a token saying that we now know that b is
true, and the digit −1 acts as a token saying that we now know that b is false. Note that
for the name 0#0#0 · · · of b = unknown, it is not possible to decide in a finite time if b is
unknown or if it will happen to be false or true in the future. In other words, the procedure
deciding the value of b, if b = true or false, diverges when b = unknown.
     Though we present the specific representations and work with them in this paper, the
theory of admissibility [Wei00, Chapter 3.2] ensures their universality with regard to the
topologies: the discrete topology of Z, the standard topology of R, and the generalized
Sierpinski topology of K:
                  
                    ∅, {true}, {false}, {true, false}, {unknown, true, false} .
As we are only interested in computability in this paper, the underlying representations can
be replaced with any other computably equivalent representations.
    When we have a function to a flat domain f : X → Y⊥ , we consider it as a partial
function which is properly defined at dom(f ) := {x ∈ X | f (x) ̸= ⊥}. When X and Y are
represented by δX and δY , respectively, f is said (δX , δY )-computable if there is a type-2
machine [Wei00, Chapter 2.1] that for all x ∈ dom(f ) transforms each δX -name of x to a
   1The domains of representations can be any Cantor or Baire space where type-2 computability theory can
be built on; cf. [Wei00, Exercise 3.2.17].
Vol. 20:2                               EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                    17:9




δY -name of f (x).2 In this case, we say the type-2 machine realizes f . We drop the prefix
(δX , δY ) if it is obvious or irrelevant which specific representations underlie. An important
fact to note here is that the realizer of f : X → Y⊥ does not need to diverge in the case
f (x) = ⊥. The realizer on any name of such x not in the domain can either diverge or even
compute a meaningless result.
      We often call a function f : X → Y⊥ partial to emphasize that ⊥ may be a function
value. Often we call f which does not admit ⊥ as its function value total when we want to
emphasize it. To make our notation more informative, let us write f : X → Y in the case
f : X → Y⊥ is total.
      For a multivariate f : X1 × · · · × Xd → Y⊥ , its computability is defined by the existence
of a type-2 machine with multiple inputs realizing it in a similar manner. Equivalently, it
can be defined with regard to the product representation for its domain:
   δX1 ×···×Xd (φ) = (x1 , · · · , xd ) if and only if δXj (n 7→ φ(d × n + j − 1)) = xj for each j.
Again, other computably equivalent representations of products can replace this specific
product representation.
    The following are examples of computable partial and total functions:
Examples 2.1 (Primitive operations).
(1) For any represented set X, its identity function id : X → X is computable.
(2) The constants true, false, unknown ∈ K and k ∈ Z are computable as constant functions
    from any represented set.
(3) The logic operations for Kleene three-valued logic ¬          ˆ, ∧
                                                       ˆ : K → K, ∨  ˆ : K × K → K defined
    as the following tables are computable. Note that unknown stands for indeterminacy.
          ˆ
          ∧          true       false unknown
        true         true       false unknown
        false        false      false   false
      unknown      unknown      false unknown

          ˆ
          ∨        true   false unknown
        true       true   true    true
        false      true   false unknown
      unknown      true unknown unknown

      ¬
      ˆ     true false unknown
            false true unknown

    This justifies the name Kleenean for K.
(4) The operators of the Presburger arithmetic + : Z × Z → Z, − : Z → Z, and the K-valued
    comparison tests =, ≤: Z × Z → K (which does not admit unknown) are computable.
(5) The field operators +, × : R × R → R, − : R → R, and −1 : R → R⊥ where the
    multiplicative inversion is not defined at 0, i.e., 0−1 = ⊥, are computable. (Any realizer
    for the multiplicative inversion function will diverge on 0−1 = ⊥.)
(6) The exponentiation ı : Z ∋ p 7→ 2p ∈ R called precision embedding is computable.

   2It also can be defined equivalently using oracle machines [KC96].
17:10    Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler             Vol. 20:2




(7) The K-valued real number comparison ⋖ : R×R → K from Equation (1.1) is computable.
    It is realized by a procedure that given some names ϕx , ϕy of x, y ∈ R computes the
    sequence of integers:
                                  
                                  1
                                        if ϕx (n) + 2 < ϕy (n),
                             n 7→ −1 if ϕy (n) + 2 < ϕx (n),
                                  
                                    0    otherwise.
                                  

    We can easily verify that the resulting sequence is a name of x ⋖ y.
(8) A partial projection map proj : X d × Z → X⊥ defined by
                                                        (
                                                         xn if 0 ≤ n < d,
                       proj((x0 , · · · , xd−1 ), n) :=
                                                         ⊥ otherwise,

    and a partial updating map update : X d × Z × X → (X d )⊥ defined by
                                           (
                                            (x0 , · · · , xn−1 , x, xn+1 , · · · , xd−1 ) if 0 ≤ n < d,
     update((x0 , · · · , xd−1 ), n, x) :=
                                            ⊥                                             otherwise,
    are computable.
(9) A total projection map proji : X1 × · · · × Xd → Xi defined by proji (x1 , · · · , xd ) := xi
    and a total updating map updatei : X1 × · · · × Xd × Xi → X1 × · · · × Xd defined by
    updatei ((x1 , · · · , xd ), y) := (x1 , · · · , xi−1 , y, xi+1 , · · · , xd ) updating the i’th entry xi with
    y, are computable.


2.2. Computable Infinite Multi-valued functions. Partial multi-valued functions are
non-empty set-valued functions f : X → P(Y⊥ ) that model nondeterministic computations
in the following sense. For an input x, f (x) is the set of all possible nondeterministic values
that the computation modelled by f can yield, including ⊥ if there is a nondeterministic
branch for which the computation fails. We say a function of type f : X → P(Y⊥ ) a (partial )
multi-valued function which is properly defined at dom(f ) := {x | ⊥ ̸∈ f (x)}. We also often
call a partial multi-valued function total when its function values never contain ⊥; i.e.,
dom(f ) = X.
     For a partial multi-valued function f : X → P(Y⊥ ), when the underlying sets X, Y are
represented by δX and δY , respectively, we say that f is (δX , δY )-computable if there is
a type-2 machine that for all x ∈ dom(f ) transforms each δX -name of x to a δY -name of
some y ∈ f (x). Note that the realizer ’s behaviour on non-valid inputs is not specified. It
can either diverge or compute a meaningless value. We omit the prefix (δX , δY ) if it is not
necessary to explicitly specify the underlying representations. Note that nondeterminism
happens due to the fact that even for a fixed x, for its different names, the realizer can
compute different y, y ′ ∈ f (x) though the realizer itself is deterministic.


2.3. Computable (Finite) Multi-valued functions and Plotkin Powerdomain.
Using the entire non-empty power-set P(Y⊥ ) causes the same problem that motivated [Plo76,
Section 2] that it does not give us a nice order theoretic property in defining denotational
semantics. Reminding that ERC only provides finite nondeterminism, and that as long as
only real numbers and integers are allowed as inputs there is no necessarily infinite integer
Vol. 20:2                                 EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                       17:11




multi-valued function (see Fact 2.4), we safely restrict to Plotkin powerdomain [Plo76]. For
a set X, the powerdomain on its flat domain X⊥ is defined by
            P(X⊥ ) := {p ⊆ X ∪ {⊥} | p ̸= ∅, and p is finite or contains ⊥} ⊆ P(X⊥ )
endowed with Egli-Milner ordering:
                    p ⊑ q ⇔ (∀x ∈ p ∃y ∈ q. x ≤ y) ∧ (∀y ∈ q ∃x ∈ p. x ≤ y) .
Here, x ≤ y is the order on the flat domain that holds if and only if x = ⊥ or x = y.
The constructed powerdomain for any flat domain X⊥ is known to be a ω-cpo with the
least element {⊥} [Rey09, Chapter 7.2]. We say a partial multi-valued function of type
f : X → P(Y⊥ ) ⊆ P(Y⊥ ) finite.
    For a function to a flat-domain f : X → Y⊥ , let us write f ‡ : X → P(Y⊥ ) for
the embedding f ‡ (x) := {f (x)}. For a multivariate partial multi-valued function f :
X1 × · · · × Xd → P(Y⊥ ), its extension f † : P((X1 )⊥ ) × · · · × P((Xd )⊥ ) → P(Y⊥ ) is defined by
                                                       (
                †
                                            [           {f (x1 , · · · , xd )} if ∀i. xi ̸= ⊥,
               f (p1 , · · · , pd ) :=
                                       x ∈p ,··· ,x ∈p
                                                        {⊥}                    otherwise.
                                      1    1        d   d

Furthermore, the extension by one argument f †i : X1 × · · · × P((Xi )⊥ ) × · · · × Xd → P(Y⊥ )
is defined by
                                                         (
                                                     [ {f (x1 , · · · , xi , · · · xd )} if xi ̸= ⊥,
              f †i (x1 , · · · , p, · · · , xd ) :=
                                                    x ∈p
                                                          {⊥}                            otherwise.
                                                i

The embedding and extensions can be more naturally understood in the setting of category
theory [BVS93, AJ95].
     The composition of two partial multi-valued functions f : X → P(Y⊥ ) and g : Y → P(Z⊥ )
is expressed by g † ◦ f : X → P(Y ). This composition is continuous in both arguments [Plo76,
Section 6]. In other words, given f, fi : X → P(Y⊥ ) and g, gi : Y → P(Z⊥ ) where fi and gi
are increasing chains with regard to the point-wise orderings, it holds that
                  G                       G        G †            G †
                      (g † ◦ fi ) = g † ◦   fi and   (gi ◦ f ) =     gi ◦ f.
                   i∈N                    i∈N               i∈N              i∈N
Partial composition is also continuous: Consider a multivariate multi-valued function
f : X1 × · · · × Xd → P(Y⊥ ), a list of functions gj : X → Xj for j ̸= i, and a chain of
multi-valued functions gi,k : X → P((Xi )⊥ ) in k. Then,
                 G                                                                G
                    f †i ◦ ⟨g1 , · · · , gi,k , · · · gd ⟩ = f †i ◦ ⟨g1 , · · · ,   gi,k , · · · gd ⟩ .
                  k∈N                                                  k∈N
Here, for a finite collection of functions f1 , · · · , fd sharing their domains, ⟨f1 , · · · , fd ⟩ denotes
x 7→ (f1 (x), · · · , fd (x)).
    For each set X, define Cond : K × P(X⊥ ) × P(X⊥ ) → P(X⊥ ) by
                                                   
                                                   p
                                                             if b = true,
                               Cond(b, p, q) := q             if b = false,
                                                   
                                                       {⊥} otherwise,
                                                   

a conditional combinator of K. For any b : X → P(K⊥ ) and S : X → P(X⊥ ), due to the
continuity of compositions, the following operator can be seen as continuous:
                      W(b, S)(f : X → P(X⊥ )) := Cond†1 ◦ ⟨b, f † ◦ S, id‡ ⟩ .
17:12   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler   Vol. 20:2



                                                                          
The continuity ensures the existence of the least fixed point lfp W(b, S) : X → P(X⊥ )
which is used to define the denotations of loops later in Section 4.
    The following are examples of computable (finite) multi-valued functions:
Examples 2.2 (Primitive multi-valued operations).
(1) When f : X → Y⊥ is a computable partial/total function, its embedding f ‡ : X → P(Y⊥ )
    is a computable partial/total multi-valued function.
(2) When f : X → P(Y⊥ ) and g : Y → P(Z⊥ ) are computable partial multi-valued functions,
    their composition g † ◦ f : X → P(Z⊥ ) is a computable partial multi-valued function.
(3) When fi : X → P((Yi )⊥ ) and g : Y1 × · · · × Yd → Z are computable multi-valued
    functions, their composition g † ◦ ⟨f1 , · · · , fd ⟩ : X → P(Z⊥ ) is a computable multi-valued
    function.
(4) For each n ∈ N, the nondeterministic selection function choosen : Kn → P(Z⊥ ) defined
    by
                                           (
                                            {i | bi = true} if there is i s.t. bi = true,
           choosen (b0 , · · · , bn−1 ) :=
                                            {⊥}                otherwise,
    is a computable partial multi-valued function.
       It is realized by the procedure which when it receives ϕ0 , · · · , ϕn−1 as some names
    of b0 , · · · , bn−1 , for each p = 0, 1, · · · , checks ϕi (p) until it finds ϕi (p) = 1 implying
    bi = true. If the realizer finds such i, it returns i#i#i# · · · as the name of the index
    i ∈ choosen (b0 , · · · , bn−1 ). Note that depending on the given names, the realizer can
    pick a different index. If there is no choosable index, the realizer will diverge.
(5) For any computable f : X → P(K⊥ ) and g, h : X → P(Y⊥ ), the composite multi-valued
    function
                                     Cond†1 ◦ ⟨f, g, h⟩ : X → P(Y⊥ )
    is computable.
(6) Define Kond : K × P(R⊥ ) × P(R⊥ ) → P(R⊥ ), a continuous extension of Cond by
                                 
                                 
                                 p     if b = true,
                                 
                                 q     if b = false,
                Kond(b, p, q) :=
                                 
                                 {x} if b = unknown ∧ p = q = {x},
                                 
                                  {⊥} otherwise,
                                 

    with regard to the topology of K; cmp. [Wei00, Theorem 2.3.8] and “parallel if” from PCF
    [Plo77]. For any computable f : X → P(K⊥ ) and g, h : X → P(R⊥ ), the composition
    Kond†1 ◦ ⟨f, g, h⟩ : X → P(R⊥ ) is a computable partial multi-valued function.
       Here, we make a further explanation of this operation. Though this operation at first
    glance seems to violate the principle that we cannot make a case distinction on b ∈ K,
    since this operation is continuous at b = unknown, it is not the case. The operation can
    be realized without testing b = unknown or p = q. We describe one possible realizer of
    Kond†1 ◦ ⟨f, g, h⟩ to make it clearer.
       For any u ∈ X, write r := f (u) ∈ P(K⊥ ), p := g(u), q := h(u) ∈ P(R⊥ ) and assume
    ⊥ ̸∈ Kond†1 (r, p, q). (Recall that we do not need to analyze how our realizer behaves
    when ⊥ ∈ Kond†1 (r, p, q).) Since ⊥ is not in any of p, q, r, we are given names ϕb , ϕx , ϕy
    of b, x, y, respectively, where b ∈ r, x ∈ p, and y ∈ q. For some z ∈ Kond†1 (r, p, q) and
    its name ϕ, the realizer needs to compute n 7→ ϕ(n).
Vol. 20:2                               EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                           17:13




       The realizer first tests if ϕx (n + 2) and ϕy (n + 2) differ by more than 2. In this case
    (i), since we can conclude that x ̸= y, we test if b = true or b = false by inspecting
    ϕb (0), ϕb (1), · · · . If b = true, since x ∈ Kond†1 (r, p, q), let x be the z and ϕx be the ϕz
    and let the realizer return ϕx (n) for the ϕz (n). We can let the realizer work similarly
    in the other case b = false. If b was unknown, the realizer’s inspecting procedure will
    diverge. However, this is against our assumption that b = unknown and p ̸= q makes
    ⊥ ∈ Kond†1 (r, p, q).
       For the other case (ii) where ϕx (n + 2) and ϕy (n + 2) are different by at most 2,
    from the two integers, the realizer can compute k ∈ Z where |x − k · 2−n | ≤ 2−n and
    |y − k · 2−n | ≤ 2−n hold. Without being concerned with b, the realizer returns the
    computed k for ϕz (n) as a valid n’th entry of some names of both x and y. There
    are some hypothetical cases to analyze. If x = y, then the realizer will execute this
    second case (ii) indefinitely for all n and yield a name of x (which can be different from
    ϕx or ϕy ). Regardless of b, even when b = unknown, since x ∈ Kond†1 (r, p, q) as long
    as ⊥ ̸∈ Kond†1 (r, p, q), we can conclude that the realizer is computing a correct name.
    Otherwise, if x ̸= y, after returning some finite entries of a name that works for both x
    and y, the realizer will execute the first case (i) which is already analyzed to be correct.
       Note that in the case b = unknown, p, q being singleton is crucial. When we ease the
    condition to p = q without forcing them to be a singleton, there is a case where the
    nondeterministically picked inputs x ∈ p and y ∈ q are different. In this case, at some
    point, the realizer executes the first case (i) and diverges by inspecting b.
    Observe from the definitions that a realizer of a partial (multi-valued) function can
be seen also as a realizer of some other partial (multi-valued) functions because (1) the
out-of-domain behaviour of realizers is not specified and (2) for a partial multi-valued
function, its realizer only has to compute some of the possible function values. Specifically:
Fact 2.3. If a partial function f : X → Y⊥ is computable, any domain restriction g : X → Y⊥
such that ∀x. g(x) ≤ f (x) is computable by the same realizers. Similarly, if a partial multi-
valued function f : X → P(Y⊥ ) is computable, any domain restriction and function-value
enlargement g : X → P(Y⊥ ) such that ∀x. g(x) ⊑ f (x) or f (x) ⊆ g(x) is computable by the
same realizers.
     For any real number or integer, the set of its names is compact with regard to the
standard Baire space topology on ZN . Hence, for any type-2 computable realizer of an
integer partial multi-valued function f : X1 × · · · × Xd → P(Z⊥ ) where Xi = Z or R, for fixed
inputs (x1 , · · · , xd ), the image of the realizer of the compact set of names is also compact
as any type-2 computable realizer is continuous. That means even when f (x1 , · · · , xd ) is
infinite, there are only finitely many different integers that its realizer actually computes;
see [Bra95, Theorem 4.2].
Fact 2.4. Any computable multi-valued function f : X1 × · · · × Xd → P(Z⊥ ) where Xi = Z
or R, admits finite refinement in the sense that there is a computable finite multi-valued
function g : X1 × · · · × Xd → P(Z⊥ ) such that ∀(x1 , · · · , xd ). g(x1 , · · · , xd ) ⊆ f (x1 , · · · , xd )
holds.
     In addition to the above justification of our use of Plotkin powerdomain, the following
is a note on the continuity issue regarding nondeterminism:
Remark 2.5. Note that choosen : Kn → P(Z⊥ ) is not (domain-theoretic) continuous when K
is ordered by b1 ≤ b2 iff b1 = b2 or b1 = unknown. This is observed in [MRE07] and there it is
17:14   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler   Vol. 20:2




suggested to use Hoare powerdomain instead. However, our approach distinguishes (domain-
theoretic) continuity and computability of primitives: we do not use (domain-theoretic)
continuity as a criterion for computability. We use continuity to define the semantics of
loops whose computability is studied separately using the notion of type-2 computability of
realizers. In other words, as long as we have a fact that choosen : Kn → P(Z⊥ ) is computable,
there is no need to make it (domain-theoretic) continuous by giving an order on K. This
way we still can use Plotkin powerdomain in defining our semantics such that we do not
need to have separate operational semantics to express termination as in [MRE07].
    We conclude this section with a remark on how the formulations of computable partial
functions and multi-valued functions in this paper are related to the traditional formulations
in computable analysis.
Remark 2.6. In the traditional setting of computable analysis:
(1) The computability of a partial function presented by f :⊆ X → Y is equivalent to the
    computability of f⊥ : X → Y⊥ defined by x 7→ f (x) if x ∈ dom(f ) and ⊥ if x ̸∈ dom(f ).
    Similarly, the computability of f : X → Y⊥ is equivalent to the computability of
    f ↾dom(f ) :⊆ X → Y . Here, ↾ is a notation for the domain restriction and recall that
    dom(f ) = {x | f (x) ̸= ⊥}.
(2) The computability of a partial multi-valued function presented by f :⊆ X ⇒ Y , which is
    a partial non-empty set-valued function, is equivalent to the computability of f{⊥} : X →
    P(Y⊥ ). Similarly, the computability of f : X → P(Y⊥ ) is equivalent to the computability
    of f ↾dom(f ) :⊆ X ⇒ Y . Recall that dom(f ) = {x | ⊥ ̸∈ f (x)}.



          3. Formal Syntax and Typing Rules of Exact Real Computation
In this section, we provide the formal syntax and typing rules of ERC(F, G) for any F and
G according to the following convention:
Convention 3.1. Fix a (possibly empty) finite set F of computable partial functions to
R⊥ from products of Z, R, and Rn for any n ≥ 1, as well as a (possibly empty) finite set G
of computable finite partial multi-valued functions to P(Z) from products of Z, R, and Rn
for any n ≥ 1.


3.1. Syntax. ERC is an imperative programming language comprising of the following
axiomatized constituents: data types (Section 3.1.1), terms (Section 3.1.2), commands
(Section 3.1.3), and programs (Section 3.1.4).


3.1.1. Data Types. The data types that ERC provides are as follow:
                            τ ::= K | Z | R | R[n] for each n = 1, 2, · · ·
See that ERC provides countably many data types: for each natural number n ≥ 1, there is
a data type R[n], which represents the set of arrays of real numbers of fixed length n. Note
n here is a meta-level expression which is not a ERC “term” from Section 3.1.2.
Vol. 20:2                                        EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                   17:15




3.1.2. Terms. Although the type of a term is judged later by typing rules in Section 3.2,
here we follow the following conventions: Write m, ℓ to denote terms which should be typed
Z, u, v to denote terms which should be typed R, and b to denote terms which should be
typed K. Arbitrary terms are denoted by t. For some fixed countable set of variables V, the
term language of ERC is defined as follows.
   t, m, ℓ, u, v, b ::=
      k                                        k ∈ Z; Z literal
    | true | false | unknown                   K literal
    | [t1 , · · · , tn ]                       array literal
    |x                                         x ∈ V; variable
    | t[m]                                     array access
    | t1 + t2 | −t                             addition and additive inversion
    |m≤ℓ|m=ℓ                                   integer comparison and equality test
                    −1
    |u×v |u                                    real multiplication and multiplicative inversion
    |u⋖v                                       real comparison
    | 2m                                       precision embedding
    |¬        ˆ b2 | b1 ∨
     ˆ b | b1 ∧         ˆ b2                   Kleene logic
    | f (t1 , · · · , td )                     (f : X1 × · · · × Xd → R⊥ ) ∈ F; primitive function call
    | g(t1 , · · · , td )                      (g : X1 × · · · × Xd → P(Z⊥ )) ∈ G;
                                                 primitive multi-valued function call
    | choosen (b0 , b1 , · · · , bn−1 )        n ∈ N; multi-valued choice
    |b?u:v                                     continuous conditional
    Note that we do not provide integer multiplication and any other coercion than 2m
unless they are provided through F, G. For each natural number n, choosen is a distinct
term construct. However, since the n is determined syntactically by the number of the
arguments, we may omit it and instead, simply refer to choose(). We introduce m = ℓ as a
                                                       ˆ m ≤ ℓ because their denotations
term construct instead of as an abbreviation for m ≤ ℓ ∧
which are defined later in Section 4.1 do not agree.

3.1.3. Commands. ERC provides a strict distinction between its term language and command
language where loops belong only to the command language. Commands in ERC are
inductively constructed as follows.
            S       ::= skip                                       skip
                             | x := t                              variable assignment
                             | x[m] := t                           array assignment
                             | let x : τ = t                       variable declaration
                             | S1 ; S2                             sequential composition
                             | if b then S1 else S2 end            branching
                             | while b do S end                    loop
17:16   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler         Vol. 20:2




    The variable declaration let statement introduces a variable with limited scope in a
loop or a conditional branch; see the related typing rules in Figure 2.


3.1.4. Programs. Having data types, terms, and commands defined, we can finally define
what a program in ERC is. A program in ERC is defined to be in either of the two forms:
         input x1 : τ1 , x2 : τ2 , · · · , xn : τn      input x1 : τ1 , x2 : τ2 , · · · , xn : τn
           S                                              S
         return t                                       return t as p → −∞
Here, xi and p are variables varying over V and τi varies over {Z, R, R[1], R[2], · · · }. The
variable p that is separated from the other input variables is the precision parameter. The
intended behaviour of a program in the right kind is, taking x1 , · · · , xn as inputs, to compute
the limit of the command S and the return term t as p goes to −∞. This is formally defined
later in Section 4.


3.2. Typing Rules. Here we define well-typedness of terms (Section 3.2.1), well-formedness
of commands (Section 3.2.2), and well-typedness of programs (Section 3.2.3) under a context
which is a mapping from a finite set of variables to their corresponding types. We use a list
of assignments Γ := x1 : τ1 , x2 : τ2 , · · · , xn : τn to represent the context mapping a variable
xi to its data type τi for i = 1, . . . , n.


3.2.1. Well-Typed Terms. Well-typedness of a term t in ERC to τ under a context Γ is
written as Γ ⊢ t : τ . Figure 1 shows ERC’s type inference rules. Note that + and − are used
both in integer and real number operations.


3.2.2. Well-formed Commands. Unlike terms, a command in ERC may modify contexts.
Let us denote a command S under a context Γ being well-formed and yielding a new context
Γ′ as Γ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′ . The Well-formedness of commands is defined by the inference rules in
Figure 2.
      The only construct that modifies a context is let x : τ = t (variable declaration). When
it is executed under a context Γ, the command is well-formed if x is not already included in
Γ and the type of the initializing term t is of the declared type τ . After the execution, we
get the new context Γ, x : τ . However, when a context changes inside a branch or a loop, it
gets restored once the block is finished. In other words, the variables created inside of a
branch or a loop only survive locally (as common for example in C++).
      Here we state a property of our typing rules that is needed later. We omit detailed
proof as it can be seen directly by structural induction on the type judgement.
Lemma 3.2. Whenever Γ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′ , the new context Γ′ is an extension of Γ in the sense
that there is a context ∆ such that Γ′ = Γ, ∆.
Vol. 20:2                                  EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                               17:17




                                     Figure 1: Typing rules for terms

             Γ⊢k:Z               Γ ⊢ true : K                Γ ⊢ false : K           Γ ⊢ unknown : K

            Γ ⊢ ti : R (for i = 1, · · · , n)             Γ(x) = τ             Γ ⊢ m : Z Γ ⊢ t : R[n]
                Γ ⊢ [t1 , · · · , tn ] : R[n]             Γ⊢x:τ                     Γ ⊢ t[m] : R

            Γ ⊢ t1 : τ Γ ⊢ t2 : τ                                        Γ ⊢ t : τ (⋆, τ, τ ′ ) ∈ UnTy
                                  (⊙, τ, τ ′ ) ∈ BinTy
               Γ ⊢ t1 ⊙ t2 : τ ′                                        Γ ⊢ ⋆ t : τ′

                  (f : X1 × · · · × Xd → R⊥ ) ∈ F Γ ⊢ ti : ⟨Xi ⟩               (for i = 1, · · · , d)
                                         Γ ⊢ f (t1 , · · · , td ) : R

                 (g : X1 × · · · × Xd → P(Z⊥ )) ∈ G Γ ⊢ ti : ⟨Xi ⟩ (for i = 1, · · · , d)
                                          Γ ⊢ g(t1 , · · · , td ) : Z

             Γ ⊢ bi : K (for i = 0, 1, · · · , n − 1)              Γ⊢b:K Γ⊢u:R Γ⊢v:R
              Γ ⊢ choosen (b0 , b1 , · · · , bn−1 ) : Z                Γ ⊢ (b ? u : v) : R

               BinTy := {(+, R, R), (+, Z, Z), (≤, Z, K), (=, Z, K), (⋖, R, K), (×, R, R),
                          ˆ , K, K), (∨
                         (∧           ˆ , K, K)}
                                                             ¬, K, K), (□−1 , R, R)}
                UnTy := {(−, R, R), (−, Z, Z), (2□ , Z, R), (ˆ
                    ⟨Z⟩ := Z
                    ⟨R⟩ := R
                  ⟨Rn ⟩ := R[n]     (for n = 1, 2, · · · )


                                  Figure 2: Typing rules for commands
                             Γ ⊢ t : τ Γ(x) = τ                  Γ⊢m:Z          Γ ⊢ t : R Γ(x) = R[n]
     Γ ⊢ skip ▷ Γ                Γ ⊢ x := t ▷ Γ                               Γ ⊢ x[m] := t ▷ Γ

                     x ̸∈ dom(Γ) Γ ⊢ t : τ                        Γ ⊢ S1 ▷ Γ1 Γ1 ⊢ S2 ▷ Γ2
                   Γ ⊢ let x : τ = t ▷ Γ, x : τ                        Γ ⊢ S1 ; S2 ▷ Γ2

              Γ ⊢ b : K Γ ⊢ S1 ▷ Γ1 Γ ⊢ S2 ▷ Γ2                            Γ ⊢ b : K Γ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′
               Γ ⊢ if b then S1 else S2 end ▷ Γ                         Γ ⊢ while b do S end ▷ Γ


3.2.3. Well-Typed Programs. Consider the two different kinds of ERC programs:
   PZ := input x1 : τ1 , x2 : τ2 , · · · , xd : τd            PR :=      input x1 : τ1 , x2 : τ2 , · · · , xd : τd
           S                                                               S
         return t                                                        return t as p → −∞
The first program PZ has type τ1 × · · · × τd → Z if there is a context Γ′ such that
                         x1 : τ1 , x2 : τ2 , · · · , xd : τd ⊢ S ▷ Γ′   and    Γ′ ⊢ t : Z .
17:18   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler        Vol. 20:2




Similarly, PR has type τ1 × · · · × τd → R if there is a context Γ′ such that
                      p : Z, x1 : τ1 , · · · , xd : τd ⊢ S ▷ Γ′   and   Γ′ ⊢ t : R .
Note that p : Z is not regarded as an input variable and recall that τi varies over
{Z, R, R[1], R[2], · · · } and cannot be K.
    We call an ERC program an integer program if it is of the first kind (PZ ) and a real
program if it is of the second kind (PR ).


                 4. Denotational Semantics of Exact Real Computation
We define multi-valued semantics for well-typed terms (Section 4.1), well-formed commands
(Section 4.2), and well-typed programs (Section 4.3). In this semantics, the objects of ERC
are assigned mathematical meanings that are arguably (i) closest possible to the intuition
of real numbers as entities to be operated on exactly while simultaneously featuring (ii)
Turing-completeness.
    We start with denotations for data types and the definition of states.
Definition 4.1.
(1) Data types are interpreted as intended:
                        JKK = K,       JZK = Z,      JRK = R,      JR[n]K = Rn .
    Recall that n above is a natural number greater than 0 which is not to be confused with
    an integer-typed term in ERC.
(2) Contexts are interpreted as sets of assignments. Formally, given a context Γ = x1 :
    τ1 , . . . , xn : τd , then
                                  JΓK := Jτ1 K × · · · × Jτd K .
(3) Given a context Γ, an element σ ∈ JΓK is called state which is a specific assignment of
    variables contained in the domain of the context.


4.1. Denotations of Terms. A (well-typed) term’s meaning under a state is, considering
the nondeterminism in ERC, the set of all possible values that the term can evaluate. For
example, a well-typed term Γ ⊢ t : R can evaluate to multiple values in R under a state
σ ∈ JΓK. Moreover, if 0 is among these values, then the compound term t−1 could be
undefined in addition to its defined values derived from non-zero values of t. This is reflected
by including ⊥ in the denotation, which is thus an element of P(JRK⊥ ).
Definition 4.2. Recall the computable partial multi-valued functions specified in Exam-
ples 2.1 and Examples 2.2. Given a well-typed term t such that Γ ⊢ t : τ , we define its
denotation as a partial multi-valued function JΓ ⊢ t : τ K : JΓK → P(Jτ K⊥ ) inductively as
follows:
                                 JΓ ⊢ k : ZK := σ 7→ {k}
                              JΓ ⊢ true : KK := σ 7→ {true}
                             JΓ ⊢ false : KK := σ 7→ {false}
                        JΓ ⊢ unknown : KK := σ 7→ {unknown}
                                                        †
                   JΓ ⊢ [t1 , · · · , tn ] : R[n]K := id‡ ◦⟨JΓ ⊢ t1 : RK , · · · , JΓ ⊢ tn : RK⟩
Vol. 20:2                                    EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                              17:19




 Jx1 : τ1 , · · · , xi : τi , · · · , xd : τd ⊢ xi : τi K := proj‡i
                                                                      †
                                   JΓ ⊢ t[m] : RK := proj‡ ◦ ⟨JΓ ⊢ t : R[n]K , JΓ ⊢ m : ZK⟩
                                                        †
                                 Γ ⊢ t1 ⊙ t2 : τ ′ := ⊙‡ ◦ ⟨JΓ ⊢ t1 : τ K , JΓ ⊢ t2 : τ K⟩
                               q                  y

                                                    for (⊙, τ, τ ′ ) ∈ BinTy
                                                          †
                                      Γ ⊢ ⋆ t : τ ′ := ⋆ ‡ ◦ JΓ ⊢ t : τ K
                                     q             y

                                                      for (⋆, τ, τ ′ ) ∈ UnTy
                                                               †
                         JΓ ⊢ f (t1 , . . . , td ) : RK := f ‡ ◦ ⟨JΓ ⊢ t1 : ⟨X1 ⟩K , · · · , JΓ ⊢ td : ⟨Xd ⟩K⟩
                                                      where (f : X1 × · · · × Xd → R⊥ ) ∈ F
                         JΓ ⊢ g(t1 , . . . , td ) : ZK := g † ◦ ⟨JΓ ⊢ t1 : ⟨X1 ⟩K , · · · , JΓ ⊢ td : ⟨Xd ⟩K⟩
                                                      where (g : X1 × · · · × Xd → P(Z⊥ )) ∈ G
            JΓ ⊢ choosen (b0 , · · · , bn−1 ) : ZK := choose†n ◦ ⟨JΓ ⊢ b0 : KK , · · · , JΓ ⊢ bn−1 : KK⟩
                            JΓ ⊢ (b ? u : v) : RK := Kond†1 ◦ ⟨JΓ ⊢ b : KK , JΓ ⊢ u : RK , JΓ ⊢ v : RK⟩


We often simply write JtK instead of JΓ ⊢ t : τ K omitting Γ and τ when they are obvious
or irrelevant. We also synonymously say t evaluates to x under σ, or t has/contains the
element x ∈ JtK σ.
     Regarding the multi-valuedness, choose() and functions from G are the only atomic
constructs that yield multi-valuedness. The denotations of all other constructs except the
two and continuous conditionals are defined by the embedding of single-valued mappings.
For the case of continuous conditionals, we can observe that Kond†1 (p, q, r) is a singleton
when p, q, and q are singletons. Hence, it does not generate multi-valuedness.
     Another remark on the multi-valuedness is that the denotation of integer equality m1 =
m2 does not coincide with that of m1 ≤ m2 ∧    ˆ m2 ≤ m1 . As an example, consider a state σ
                                                      q                         y
where Jm1 K σ = {0, 2} and Jm2 K σ = {1, 3}. Then, m1 ≤ m2 ∧       ˆ m2 ≤ m1 σ = {true, false}
whereas Jm1 = m2 K σ = {false}. This justifies introducing m1 = m2 as a separate primitive.
     Well-typedness in ERC does not prevent ⊥: The sources of ⊥ are (i) an array accessed
by a wrong index (proj), (ii) the multiplicative inverse of 0 (0−1 ), (iii) function calls to partial
(multi-valued) functions at points out of their domains, (iv) a choice operation without any
choosable argument (choose), and (v) a continuous conditional when the two arguments
u, v do not match in Kond(unknown, u, v) as u = v = {x} for some x ∈ R. We emphasize
here again that the computational meaning of ⊥ is not non-termination but is more general
non-specified behaviour; recall Section 2.
     Though P(X⊥ ) allows infinite sets (as long as they contain ⊥), this case does not occur
in our term language. The denotation of any well-typed term at any state is finite unless
the case is provided by functions in G. However, we still use the powerdomain for our term
language to use the same setting with the denotational semantics of our command language
where indeed ⊥-containing infinite sets arise.
     The computability of the denotations follows directly from the computability of the
primitive operations and of the compositions stated in Examples 2.1 and Examples 2.2:
Lemma 4.3. The denotation of any well-typed term is a computable partial multi-valued
function.
17:20   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler           Vol. 20:2




4.2. Denotations of Commands. As the denotation of a well-typed term under a state is
the set of all possible values that the term may evaluate to, considering multi-valuedness
in ERC, the denotation of a well-formed command under a state is the set of all possible
resulting states that the command may result in. Hence, we let a well-typed command
denote a function from the set of states to the restricted power-set of the resulting states:
Definition 4.4. Recall the (multi-valued) functions specified in Examples 2.1 and Exam-
ples 2.2. Given a well-formed command S such that Γ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′ , we define its denotation to
be a partial multi-valued function JΓ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′ K : JΓK → P(JΓ′ K⊥ ) inductively as follows:
                      JΓ ⊢ skip ▷ ΓK := id‡
                                                            †
                    JΓ ⊢ xi := t ▷ ΓK := update‡i ◦ ⟨id‡ , JtK⟩
                                      where Γ = x1 : τ1 , · · · , xi : τi , · · · , xd : τd
                                                            †                      †
                 JΓ ⊢ xi [m] := t ▷ ΓK := update‡i ◦ ⟨id‡ , update‡ ◦ ⟨proj‡i , JmK , JtK⟩⟩
                                             where Γ = x1 : τ1 , · · · , xi : R[n], · · · , xd : τd
                                                    †
             Γ ⊢ let x : τ = t ▷ Γ := id‡ ◦⟨id‡ , JtK⟩
                                       ′
            q                            y
                                                     y†
                    Γ ⊢ S1 ; S2 ▷ Γ′ := ∆ ⊢ S2 ▷ Γ′ ◦ JΓ ⊢ S1 ▷ ∆K
                   q                y   q
                                                         †             y † q
JΓ ⊢ if b then S1 else S2 end ▷ ΓK := Cond†1 ◦ ⟨JbK , ↾‡Γ ◦ Γ ⊢ S1 ▷ Γ′ , ↾‡Γ ◦ Γ ⊢ S2 ▷ Γ′′ ⟩
                                                             q                              y
                                                       †
       JΓ ⊢ while b do S end ▷ ΓK := lfp W(JbK , ↾‡Γ ◦ Γ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′ )
                                                           q        y

Here, ↾Γ : JΓ, ∆K → JΓK for any contexts Γ, ∆ when Γ = x1 : τ1 , · · · , xd : τd is defined by
                             (x1 , · · · , xd , y1 , · · · , ym ) 7→ (x1 , · · · , xd ).
We often write JSK to denote JΓ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′ K omitting Γ and Γ′ when they are obvious or
irrelevant.
     When a term is assigned to a variable, an array variable, or a newly created variable as
its initial value, the underlying state branches into multiple states for each single value in
the denotation of the term. Instead of having a single state storing multi-values, we choose
to have multiple states where each stores single-values.
     The denotations of conditional statements and loops are well-defined due to Lemma 3.2
which justifies the post-composed restriction function ↾Γ clearing the newly added local
variables. Regarding loops and branches, note that their denotations contain unknown when
their conditions evaluate to unknown. We could also consider replacing Cond with Kond for
the semantics of conditionals. However, first, their domains do not match: Kond requires
the branches to be in P(R⊥ ) whereas we want them to be in P(JΓK⊥ ). Though one could
imagine extending Kond’s domain, recalling how Kond is realized in Examples 2.2, this
requires the resulting states of both branches to be inspected variable-wise. For this work,
we decide to keep the ordinary branching which makes a decision only on its condition and
diverges in the case the condition diverges by being unknown instead of further inspecting
the two resulting states.
     Unlike for terms, the multi-valued computability of loops needs more attention:
Proposition 4.5. For a represented set X and computable partial multi-valued functions
b : X → P(K⊥ ) and S : X → P(X⊥ ), the least fixed point
                                          
                             lfp W(b, S) : X → P(X⊥ )
Vol. 20:2                                  EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                17:21




as partial multi-valued function is computable uniformly to b and c in the sense that the
realizer for lfp W(b, S) : X → P(X⊥ ) can be defined with function calls to the realizers of
b and S for any b and S.
Proof. By the least fixed point theorem, the least fixed point is the limit of the chain
                     (0)                               (n+1)                    (n)
                  Wb,S := σ 7→ {⊥} and Wb,S                    := Cond†1 ◦ ⟨b, Wb,S ◦ S, id‡ ⟩
which, intuitively, represents the process of unrolling the loop. For any two σ, δ ∈ X,
                                                                       (n)
δ ∈ lfp W(b, S) σ if and only if there is a natural number n where δ ∈ Wb,S σ. Furthermore,
                                          (n)
⊥ ∈ lfp W(b, S) σ if and only if ⊥ ∈ Wb,S σ for all n.
     Suppose τb realizes b and τS realizes S. We consider the type-2 machine ττb ,τS (ϕσ ) on
its input ϕσ a name of some σ ∈ X with the following description:
input ϕσ
    repeat :
       ϕb := τb (ϕσ )
       i t e r a t e i := 0, 1, 2, · · · u n t i l ϕb (i) = −1 or ϕb (i) = 1
       i f ϕb (i) = 1 :
             ϕσ := τS (ϕσ )
       i f ϕb (i) = −1 :
             return ϕσ
                                          
We need to prove that if ⊥ ̸∈ lfp W(b, S) σ, ττb ,τS (ϕσ ) is defined and is a name of some
δ ∈ lfp W(b,
            S) σ. (Recall that we do not need to reason about ττb ,τS (ϕσ ) when ⊥ ∈
lfp W(b, S) σ.)
                                               (n)
     Consider the indexed variants ττb ,τS (ϕσ ) described by:
input ϕσ
    repeat :
         i f n = 0 then diverge e l s e n := n − 1
         ϕb := τb (ϕσ )
         i t e r a t e i := 0, 1, 2, · · · u n t i l ϕb (i) = −1 or ϕb (i) = 1
         i f ϕb (i) = 1 :
                 ϕσ := τS (ϕσ )
         i f ϕb (i) = −1 :
                 return ϕσ
                                                                  (n)
which is almost identical to ττb ,τS (ϕσ ) except that ττb ,τS (ϕσ ) repeats the main iteration only
at most n times and diverges unless it returns until then. By induction on n, we can easily
                                             (n)               (n)
verify that for each natural number n, ττb ,τS realizes Wb,S .
                                                         (n)
    Furthermore, it holds that as long as ττb ,τS (ϕσ ) is defined, it coincides with ττb ,τS (ϕσ ).
                                                                       (n)            (n)
Since ⊥ ̸∈ lfp W(b, S) σ, there exists n where lfp W(b, S) σ = Wb,S σ ̸∋ ⊥ and ττb ,τS (ϕσ )
                                  (n)
is a name of some δ ∈ Wb,S σ. Therefore, by the above claim, ττb ,τS (ϕσ ) coincides with
  (n)                                           
ττb ,τS (ϕσ ) which is a name of δ ∈ lfp W(b, S) σ.
    In the lemma, we say “computable uniformly to b and c” to denote that the realizer can
be defined by function calls to the realizers of b and c without depending on any further
specifics of (the realizers of) b and c. We put a justification for this notion of uniformity.
Type-2 computability provides a utm theorem stating that there exists an indexing of
17:22   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler        Vol. 20:2




type-2 machines by ZN and a universal type-2 machine for that indexing. Hence, the above
uniformity means that the realizer can be actually defined as a multivariate function that
receives the indices for the realizers of b and c as its input where the function calls are
replaced with compositions by the universal machine. In other words, the least fixed point
of W(b, c) is computable uniformly in the following sense that the operation
                                                                                    
       indices of the realizers of b, c and a name of σ 7→ a name of δ ∈ lfp W(b, c) σ
is computable for any b, c, σ. We can also make this notion formal by representing computable
partial multi-valued functions and making the above operation a computable mapping from
them using the same type-2 machine. However, since the cardinality of the set of computable
partial multi-valued functions exceeds that of ZN , it requires us to use a more general notion
of representation, namely, multi-representation [Sch02] or assemblies over Kleene’s second
algebra.
     Following up on Lemma 4.3 and Proposition 4.5, we establish the computability result
for our command language:
Lemma 4.6. The denotation of any well-formed command is a computable partial multi-
valued function.
Proof. The restriction operations are computable. Due to the computability of the primitives,
compositions, and fixed points of loops, the denotations of well-formed commands are
computable partial multi-valued functions.


4.3. Denotations of Programs. Having defined the meanings of terms and commands,
we are now ready to define denotations of well-typed ERC programs.
Definition 4.7. The denotation of a well-typed integer program
                              PZ := input x1 : τ1 , x2 : τ2 , · · · , xd : τd
                                      S
                                    return m
is a partial integer multi-valued function
                                  JPZ K : Jτ1 K × · · · × Jτd K → P(Z⊥ )
defined by JPZ K := JmK† ◦ JSK.
    The denotation of a well-typed real program
                             PR :=      input x1 : τ1 , x2 : τ2 , · · · , xd : τd
                                          S
                                        return u as p → −∞
is a partial real function JPR K : Jτ1 K × · · · × Jτd K → R⊥ that is defined by
                              (
                               x if ∀p ∈ Z. ∀y ∈ JtK† ◦ JSK (p, x1 , · · · , xd ). y ̸= ⊥ ∧ |y − x| ≤ 2p ,
  JPR K (x1 , · · · , xd ) :=
                               ⊥ otherwise.
     In words, a real program PR denotes a single-valued function f whose function value
f (x1 , · · · , xd ) is the limit of the multi-valued sequence JtK† ◦ JSK (p, x1 , · · · , xd ) as p → −∞
in the sense that for each i ∈ N, whichever yi is picked from JtK† ◦ JSK (−i, x1 , · · · , xd )
nondeterministically, yi is a 2−i approximation to f (x1 , · · · , xd ) and not ⊥. The obligated
Vol. 20:2                               EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                           17:23




rate of convergence 2p is chosen to make it coincide with the precision embedding ı : Z ∋
p 7→ 2p ∈ R.
Theorem 4.8. The denotation of a well-typed real ERC program is a computable partial
real function. The denotation of a well-typed integer ERC program is a computable partial
integer multi-valued function.
Proof. The computability of terms, commands, compositions, and limit operations [Wei00,
Theorem 4.3.7] yields the computability of the denotations of programs.
    When a real program on its input does not generate a converging sequence as its precision
parameter p heads to −∞, its function value is denoted by ⊥. This is the main motivation
for us to make ⊥ to represent not only divergence or non-termination but more general
non-specified behaviour. When a sequence is not converging, operationally, there is no
possible way to decide that the sequence is not converging. Hence, after reading some finite
portion of the sequence, believing that the rest of the sequence converges, an approximation
to the limit has to be made. That means even when we realize later that the sequence does
not follow our expectations and decides not to converge, there can be an output printed
already as the limit of the sequence which turns out to be completely meaningless as the
sequence does not converge after all. Without giving this freedom of a procedure returning
completely meaningless results on its non-valid inputs, limit operations cannot be realized.
    Recall from Fact 2.3 that in computable analysis, a machine realizing a (multi-valued)
function can be seen to realize some other (multi-valued) functions at the same time.
Reflecting this property, we add one more layer to the denotations of programs:
Definition 4.9.
(1) A well-typed real program P realizes a partial function f : X1 × · · · × Xd → R⊥ if
    ∀(x1 , · · · , xd ). f (x1 , · · · , xd ) ≤ JP K (x1 , · · · , xd ) holds. Recall that x ≤ y if and only if
    x = ⊥ or x = y for x, y ∈ R⊥ .
(2) A well-typed integer program P realizes a partial (possibly infinite) multi-valued func-
    tion f : X1 × · · · × Xd → P(Z⊥ ) if ∀(x1 , · · · , xd ). f (x1 , · · · , xd ) ⊑ JP K (x1 , · · · , xd ) or
    JP K (x1 , · · · , xd ) ⊆ f (x1 , · · · , xd ) holds.
    Note that though the denotations of integer programs are finite multi-valued functions,
they can still realize infinite multi-valued functions. Directly from Fact 2.4, we get the
computability of realizable partial (multi-valued) functions:
Corollary 4.10. Realizable partial (multi-valued) functions are computable partial (multi-
valued) functions.


                          5. Programming in Exact Real Computation
In this section, we collect several examples of (multi-valued) functions that are realizable in
ERC. They illustrate the purpose of ERC which is to allow and justify naı̈vely implementing
numerical algorithms, with computable analysis as the rigorous but hidden theoretical
foundation. They demonstrate how naturally the classical algorithms can be modified to
incorporate the Kleenean-valued comparisons and the nondeterministic choose.
     The examples are square root using Heron’s method, exponential function via two
different ways, integer rounding, matrix determinants via Gauss elimination, and root
finding. Heron’s method, as an intuitive and efficient way to compute square roots of
17:24   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler    Vol. 20:2




real numbers, is often expressed in other frameworks [Mül01, BMR18, KST20]. Through
the example, the readers can easily compare ERC with the others; similarly, for Gauss
elimination [TZ04, Section 2.2]. The example of realizing the exponential function shows
that the base language ERC0 can realize transcendental functions; this leads to a more
detailed discussion of our specification language later in Section 6. Integer rounding, on the
other hand, shows that ERC0 can nondeterministically extract names of real numbers. This
later forms a core routine in the proof of Turing-completeness in Section 5.3. Root finding,
a computational version of the intermediate value theorem is often picked as an example
in computable or constructive analysis. The example further demonstrates a trick of using
the extension sets F and G to model function calls to arbitrary external functions. This
example is chosen to be formally verified later in Section 7.
     The examples have been implemented using a shallow embedding of ERC into Haskell
which we develop on top of the AERN library for exact real number computation [KTD+ 13].3
There, though internally real numbers and Kleeneans are represented by infinite sequences,
they are hidden from the users where the users see them as abstract entities. Hence, without
a nondeterminism monad, it provides the nondeterministic choose operator which can choose
different indices for the same inputs whose internal sequences are different. In other words,
the choose operator is deterministic about the internal sequences of the arguments which are
inspected with some fixed interleaving procedure, but is nondeterministic when the internal
sequences are abstracted away.



5.1. Programming Abbreviations. Several abbreviations are used in our example pro-
grams. While deferring their introductions to each example program, here we make some
remarks for those used importantly throughout this paper.



5.1.1. Extension by denotations. Recall that the programming language ERC(F, G) is defined
relative to the sets F and G. Beyond modelling primitive operator extensions, the sets F
and G provide a trick on reasoning user-defined function calls (but without recursive calls)
from some richer exact real computation software. Instead of equipping ERC with a feature
of calling programs within programs, which removes ERC’s strict barrier between its term
language and command language, in order to keep our term language as simple as possible,
when the users want to model a program calling another program, they can use ERC(F, G)
with F or G extended with the denotations of the programs.
     When we want to extend the set F with the denotation of a real program P in ERC(F, G),
we write ERC(F ∪{P }, G) to denote ERC(F ∪{JP K}, G). Similarly, we write ERC(F, G ∪{P })
when P is an integer program in ERC(F, G). These notations are well-defined since the
denotation of a real program is a computable partial real function and the denotation of an
integer program is a computable partial integer multi-valued function. When the sets are
extended by the denotation of a program P , we write P (t1 , · · · , td ) for JP K (t1 , · · · , td ) in
the extended term language.



   3The implementation can be found in https://github.com/michalkonecny/aern2/blob/master/
aern2-erc/src/ERC/Examples.hs .
Vol. 20:2                          EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                 17:25




5.1.2. Variable scope. ERC allows local variable creations inside conditional and loop state-
ments. This mechanism for local variables can be used to define arbitrary variable scopes.
For a well-formed command Γ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′ , write
                                             {S}
for
                              Γ ⊢ if true then S else skip ▷ Γ
We can easily check:
                                 †
                              ↾‡Γ ◦ Γ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′ = JΓ ⊢ {S} ▷ ΓK .
                                   q          y




5.1.3. Term Abbreviations. We assume obvious term abbreviations such as t1 /t2 for t1 × t−1 2 ,
t1 − t2 for t1 + (−t2 ), and so on. For each integer constant k, we write k to refer to the |k|
times repeated additions of either 20 or −20 when we want it to represent the real number k.

5.1.4. Command Abbreviations. Though our default term language is restrictive without
having integer multiplications or the ordinary integer-to-real coercion, the default command
language can recover most of the restrictions. For instance, given two integer terms m1
and m2 , though we cannot have its multiplication as a term, we can have a command that
computes the multiplication and assigns the result into a variable say y : Z:
   {
        let x1 : Z = m1 ; let x2 : Z = m2 ; let k : Z = 0;
        y := 0;
        if 0 ≤ x2
        then while k + 1 ≤ x2 do y := y + x1 ; k := k + 1 end
        else while x2 + 1 ≤ k do y := y − x1 ; k := k − 1 end
        end
   }
    The local variables x1 and x2 are used to choose values from possibly multi-valued m1
and m2 and to use them consistently throughout the computation. For a context Γ such
that Γ ⊢ m1 : Z, Γ ⊢ m2 : Z, and Γ(y) = Z,
                                    Γ ⊢ y :≡ m1 × m2 ▷ Γ
abbreviates the above well-formed command whose local variables are selected to not conflict
with Γ. The notation :≡ is chosen to make it be distinguished from the usual assignment
construct := to emphasize that m1 × m2 is not a term. The following semantic equation can
be verified:
                                                   (
                                      [             {⊥}                if x1 = ⊥ ∨ x2 = ⊥,
         Jy :≡ t1 × t2 K σ =
                             x1 ∈Jt1 Kσ∧x2 ∈Jt2 Kσ
                                                    {σ[y 7→ x1 × x2 ]} otherwise.
       We can define various command abbreviations similarly for example
                                       Γ ⊢ y :≡ um ▷ Γ
17:26   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler     Vol. 20:2




when Γ ⊢ u : R, Γ ⊢ m : Z, and Γ(y) = R for the repeated multiplications satisfying
                                            (
                   m
                                  [          {⊥}           if x1 = ⊥ ∨ x2 = ⊥,
           Jy :≡ u K σ =                              x2
                          x1 ∈JuKσ∧x2 ∈JmKσ
                                             {σ[y 7→ x1 ]} otherwise.


5.2. Example Programs. We annotate assertions next to commands to convey the be-
haviours, including the domains (preconditions), of the introduced programs. However, we
remind the readers that the annotations are not part of ERC.

5.2.1. Square Root Function via Heron’s Method. Heron’s method approximates the square
root of a given real number 0 ≤ x up to any desired absolute error 2p , p ∈ Z, by calculating
                                                                          √
a contracting sequence of upper and lower approximations zn := x/yn ≤ x ≤ yn iteratively
taking the average yn+1 := (yn + zn )/2. The ERC0 program HeronSqrt illustrated in
Algorithm 1 realizes the square root function via Heron’s method.

Algorithm 1 HeronSqrt : R → R
  input x : R                                                                                 // 0 ≤ x
                                                                                                √
     let y : R = 1; let z : R = x/y ;                                                  // z ≤       x≤y
                                           
     while choose y − z ⋖ 2p , 2p−1 ⋖ y − z = 1 do
                                                                                                √
         y := (y + z)/2; z := x/y                                                      // z ≤       x≤y
     end
                                                                                              √
  return y as p → −∞                                                                 // |y − x| < 2p

    Recall that the arguments to choose are indexed from 0, hence choose(b0 , b1 ) = 1 means
that the second argument b1 must evaluate to true. The ERC program employs the multi-
valued choose() operation applied to two Kleenean-valued tests y − z ⋖ 2p and 2p−1 ⋖ y − z
where at least one of the two must be true resulting in a total loop condition. Moreover,
when the loop terminates, the first test (corresponding to return value 0) must (while the
second test, corresponding to return value 1, may or may not) be true: guaranteed to return
                        √
an approximation y to x up to absolute error 2p .

5.2.2. Exponential Function via Taylor Expansion. The exponential function has a globally
converging Taylor expansion                 X∞
                                 exp(x) =         xj /j!                            (5.1)
                                                      j=0
    A ERC real program computing it must return, given a dedicated precision parameter
p ∈ Z and argument x ∈ R, an approximation to exp(x) up to error 2p . For |x| ≤ 1 and
positive n ∈ N, the tail bound
                 X                X             X
                         xj /j! ≤    |x|j /j! ≤        2−j+1 = 2−n+1              (5.2)
                      j>n                 j>n                 j>n
justifies the straightforward algorithm as in the ERC program pExp in Algorithm 2. The
program introduces a command abbreviation let x1 , · · · , xd : τ = t for let x1 : τ =
Vol. 20:2                             EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                              17:27




Algorithm 2 pExp : R → R
   input x : R                                                                  // −1 ≤ x ≤ 1
      let j : Z = 1; let jr , f : R = 1;                                     // j ≡ jr , f ≡ j!
      let y : R = 1; let z : R = x;                                                  // z ≡ xj
      while j ≤ −p + 1 do
          y := y + z/f ;
          j := j + 1;
          jr := jr + 1;
          z := z × x;
          f := f × jr
      end
   return y as p → −∞                                                     // |y − exp(x)| ≤ 2p

Algorithm 3 posExp : R → R
   input x : R                                                                      // −1 ≤ x
      let z : R = pExp(1/2);
      let y : R = 1;
      while choose(x ⋖ 1, 1/2 ⋖ x) = 1 do
          y := y × z ;
          x := x − 1/2
      end
   return y × pExp(x) as p → −∞


t; · · · ; let xd : τ = t. In the program, the two variables j : Z and jr : R retain identical
values but have distinguished types, written as j ≡ jr in the assertions.
       The following wrapper posExp for pExp in Algorithm 3, which is a program in ERC({pExp}, ∅)
removes the restriction |x| ≤ 1 and instead works for all −1 ≤ x. Furthermore, since for
x < 0 it holds that exp(x) = 1/ exp(−x), and exp(y) = 1/ exp(y) at y = 0, we can construct
a procedure that computes exp(x) for all x ∈ R using the continuous conditional by
                               0 ⋖ x ? posExp(x) : 1/ posExp(−x).


5.2.3. Exponential Function via Iteration. pExp employs unbounded sums, which leave
the realm of the first-order language considered in Section 6 for formal specification and
verification purposes. Here we consider an alternative, iterative approach to realize the
exponential function in ERC. To this end recall for every x ∈ [0; 2] it holds [Mit70, §3.6.3]:
                        n→∞        n                      n+1 n→∞
               exp(x) ←− 1 + nx       ≤ exp(x) ≤ 1 + nx          −→ exp(x)
    This suggests the iterative ERC program iExp in Algorithm 4. It supposes 0 ≤ x ≤ 2
but can be extended to the entire real line similar to Section 5.2.2. Note that the loop
is guaranteed to terminate since b − a converges to 0 as n grows. The loop condition is
17:28   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler   Vol. 20:2




Algorithm 4 iExp : R → R
  input x : R                                                                            // 0 ≤ x ≤ 2
     let n : Z = 1;
     let nr : R = 1;
     let c : R = 1 + x; let a : R = c; let b : R = a × c;
                                             
     while choose b − a ⋖ 2p , 2p−1 ⋖ b − a = 1 do
         n := n + n;
         nr := 2 × nr ;
         c := 1 + x/nr ; a :≡ cn ; b := a × c
     end
  return a as p → −∞


total: At least one of b − a ⋖ 2p and 2p−1 ⋖ b − a must be true. Furthermore, when the loop
terminates, it must hold b − a < 2p , hence |a − exp(x)| ≤ |b − a| ≤ 2p .


5.2.4. Integer Rounding Multi-valued function. All real-to-integer rounding functions (up,
down, to nearest) are discontinuous and therefore not computable. We thus relax the
specification and instead consider the following multi-valued function with overlap:

                      Round : R ∋ x 7→ {k ∈ Z | x − 1 < k < x + 1} ⊆ Z                           (5.3)

   The ERC program Round in Algorithm 5 realizes Round. It returns, given a real x,
multi-valued integer k such that |x − k| < 1.

Algorithm 5 Round : R → Z
 1: input x : R
 2:    let k : Z = 0;
 3:    while choose(x ⋖ 1, 1/2 ⋖ x) = 1 do
 4:        k := k + 1; x := x − 1
 5:    end;
 6:    while choose(−1 ⋖ x, x ⋖ −1/2) = 1 do
 7:        k := k − 1; x := x + 1
 8:    end
 9: return k


     Intuitively, the number of steps made by Round is proportional to the value of the
argument x, that is, exponential in its binary (≈output) length because Round essentially
counts up to x.
     Recovering the rounded integer bit-wise via binary search seems exponentially more
efficient, but fails due to lack of continuity: Extracting any digit of the binary expansion
(or one of the at most two possible ones) of a given real number is uncomputable [Tur37].
Vol. 20:2                                EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                            17:29




Instead, BinRound in Algorithm 6 realizes the idea that some signed-digit expansion [Wei00,
Definition 7.2.4] of a given real number x ∈ R can be determined computably. There, the
absolute value |y| is an abbreviation for 0 ⋖ y ? y : − y.

Algorithm 6 BinRound : R → Z
 1: input x : R
 2:         let k, j, b : Z = 0; let y : R = x;
 3:         while choose(|y| ⋖ 1, 1/2 ⋖ |y|) = 1 do                               // x = y · 2j
 4:             j := j + 1; y := y/2
 5:         end;                                                                      // |y| ⋖ 1
 6:         while 1 ≤ j do                                         // x = (y + k) · 2j ∧ |y| < 1
 7:             y := y × 2;
 8:             b := choose(y ⋖ 0, −1 ⋖ y ⋖ 1, 0 ⋖ y) − 1;
                                           // b =most-significant signed binary digit of y
 9:       if b = −1 then y := y + 1 end; if b = 1 then y := y − 1 end;
10:       k := k + k + b; j := j − 1
11:    end                                                                  // |x − k| < 1
12: return k


     Due to the multi-valuedness of the loop condition at Line 3, when the loop (Lines 3 to 5)
exits, the second argument 1/2 ⋖ y may still be true, whereas the first |y| ⋖ 1 must be true.
In the integer loop (Lines 6 to 11), multi-valuedness strikes only at Line 8 which employs
choose() with trinary argument.


5.2.5. Determinant Function via Gaussian Elimination. The determinant of a d × d matrix
A = (aij )i,j is given by Leibniz’ formula
                                        X            Yd
                             det(A) =      sign(π) ·    aj,π(j)                   (5.4)
                                                  π          j=1

where the sum ranges over all d! permutations π : {1, . . . , d} → {1, . . . , d}. Since ERC
conveniently relieves the programmer from numerical issues like cancellation, this formula
gives rise to a straightforward ERC program. However one executing arithmetic operations
exponential in d.
     Common numerical approaches therefore transform A to triangular form, whose deter-
minant is simply the product of its diagonal elements [PTVF07, §2.3.3]. Following Turing
[Tur48], apply Gaussian Elimination to determine a LU factorization with full pivoting
P · A · Q = L · U of A, where P, Q denote permutation matrices and L and U are lower and
upper triangular matrices, respectively. In Gauss’ original algorithm, such search either
(i) returns the index of a non-zero entry in the given sub-matrix or (ii) asserts that said
sub-matrix is identically zero. By iterating this process, Gaussian Elimination determines
the rank k ∈ N of the original matrix A ∈ Rd×d — which depends discontinuously on A’s
entries and hence cannot be computed.
17:30    Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler      Vol. 20:2




    We thus change the specification of the determinant (and of the LUPQ factorization4 it
builds on): with the promise for the argument matrix A to have full rank—otherwise, its
determinant will vanish, anyway.
                                            (
                                  d           det(A) if det(A) ̸= 0,
                     Detd : GL(R ) ∋ A 7→                                            (5.5)
                                              ⊥       otherwise.
   We also relax pivot search (within the lower-right submatrix) to become a partial
multi-valued function:


                           (i, j) : A ∈ Rd×d ∧ k ≤ i, j < d ∧ Ai,j ̸= 0 {⊥} ∈ P(Z2⊥ )
                          
        Pivotd (A, k) =                                                                              (5.6)
Here, X{⊥} := X if X ̸= ∅ and {⊥} if X = ∅. So the argument is a real d × d matrix A and
an integer k, indicating that a pivot is to be sought for in the (d − k) × (d − k) non-zero
                                                     
sub-matrix A[k . . . d − 1, k . . . d − 1] := A[i, j] k≤i,j<d .

Algorithm 7 Pivotd : R[d × d] × Z → Z
 1: input A : R[d × d], k : Z
 2:    let i0 , j0 : Z = k; let x : R = 0;
 3:    for i : Z = k to d − 1 do
 4:          for j : Z = k to d − 1 do
                                           
 5:                x := max x, abs(A[i, j]) end end;
 6:    for i : Z = k to d − 1 do
 7:          for j : Z = k to d − 1 do
 8:                if choose(abs(A[i, j]) ⋖ x, x/2 ⋖ abs(A[i, j])) = 1 then i0 := i; j0 := j end
 9:    end end
10: return (i0 , j0 )

    In the program Pivotd in Algorithm 7, we represent matrices with fixed dimensions
using ERC’s one-dimensional arrays. For each positive natural numbers n and m, we write
A[n × m], to express a n × m-dimensional matrix, simulated by A[k] where k = n × m.
Accessing an entry A[i, j]n is then a shorthand for A[i + j + · · · + j] denoting A[i + n · j].
The repeated addition is only possible as n is a fixed natural number constant, not a ERC
term while i, j are. The subscript n is omitted for better readability when it is obvious.
Similarly the pair (i0 , j0 ) of return values is thus understood as an abbreviation of the single
integer i0 + d · j0 where d is the dimension of the input matrix.
    The program introduces more abbreviations. For any integer terms k, l and a command
S, for n : Z = k to l do S end refers to
              let n : Z = k; let m : Z = l; while (n ≤ m) do S; n := n + 1 end
with n, m not appearing in S. For a Kleenean typed term b and a command S,
                                           if b then S end
   4LUPQ factorization A 7→ (L, U, P, Q) is not unique, hence a real matrix-tuple-valued multi-function.
Vol. 20:2                              EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                          17:31




is used as an abbreviation for
                                      if b then S else skip end
Moreover, max(u, v) is a term abbreviation for u ⋖ v ? v : u.
    Based on Pivotd , the ERC(∅, {Pivotd }) program Det in Algorithm 8 computes the
non-zero determinant Detd from Equation (5.5) via LUP decomposition with full pivoting.
Note that the precision parameter p ∈ Z is present but ignored since the result gets computed
exactly.

Algorithm 8 Det : R[d × d] → R
 1: input A : R[d × d]                                                       // A invertible, p ignored
 2:    let i : Z = 0; let j : Z = 0; let k : Z = 0;
 3:    let pi : Z = 0; let pj : Z = 0; let det : R = 1;                                       // ret.val
 4:    for k := 0 to d − 2 do
 5:                                   // Convert A[k..d − 1, k..d − 1] to reduced row echelon form:
 6:        (pi , pj ) := Pivot(A, k);                                    // pi, pj ≥ k s.t. A[pi , pj ] ̸= 0.
 7:        det := det ×A[pi , pj ];
 8:        for j := 0 to d − 1 do swap(A[k, j], A[pi , j]) end;
                                                                      // Exchange rows #k and #pi
 9:        if k ̸= pi then det := − det;                                                    // flip sign
10:        for i := 0 to d − 1 do swap(A[i, k], A[i, pj ]) end;
                                                                  // Exchange columns #k and #pj
11:        if k ̸= pj then det := − det;                                                    // flip sign
12:        for j   :=  k + 1 to d − 1 do                            // Scale row #k by 1/A[k, k] and
13:              A[k, j] := A[k, j]/A[k, k];                     // and subtract the A[i, k]-fold from
14:              for i := k + 1 to d − 1                             // from rows #i = k + 1 . . . d − 1
15:                    do A[i, j] := A[i, j] − A[i, k] × A[k, j] end
16:        end; A[k, k] := 1; for i := k + 1 to d − 1 do A[i, k] := 0 end
17:    end;
18:    det := det ×A[d − 1, d − 1]
19: return det as p → −∞


     Note that pivot search in Line 6 of program Det is guaranteed to succeed in that the
(d − k) × (d − k) submatrix A[k . . . d − 1, k . . . d − 1] under consideration will indeed contain
at least one — usually non-unique — non-zero element due to the promise/restriction that
A ∈ GL(Rd ).


5.2.6. Simple Unique Root Finding Functional. The problem of finding (i.e. approximating)
a root to a given real function f occurs ubiquitously in numerics under various hypotheses.
We consider an algorithmic version of the Intermediate Value Theorem which is to find
the unique root to a given continuous f : [a; b] → R satisfying f (a) < 0 < f (b). This case
17:32   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler   Vol. 20:2




is commonly treated using Bisection: Determine the sign of f (x) at the interval midpoint
x := (a + b)/2 and recurse to either [a; x] or to [x; b] accordingly. However, since equality
is undecidable, the sign test fails in case f (x) = 0. Tri section [Her96, p. 336] instead
considers the signs of f at both one third x′ := (2a + b)/3 and at two third x′′ := (a + 2b)/3
of the interval, in parallel; and recurses to either [a; x′′ ] or to [x′ ; b] accordingly: Now at
most one of the two sign tests at f (x′ ) and f (x′′ ) can fail, provided that f ’s root is unique
and f (a) · f (b) < 0. These hypotheses also avoid common counterexamples like [Spe59] or
[Wei00, Theorem 6.3.2]. To summarize, we consider the (single-valued) root finding problem
Root : f 7→ x with f (x) = 0 for f satisfying the following first-order predicates:


   cont(f, a, b)         :≡
          ∀ϵ > 0.    ∃δ > 0.    ∀x, x′ . a ≤ x ≤ x′ ≤ x + δ ≤ b ⇒ |f (x) − f (x′ )| ≤ ϵ
   uniq(f, a, b)         :≡         cont(f, a, b) ∧ f (a) · f (b) < 0 ∧ ∃!x. a < x < b ∧ f (x) = 0
The first condition cont(f, a, b) says f is continuous in the usual sense on the interval [a; b]
and the second condition uniq(f, a, b) says f is continuous in the interval [a; b], admits a
unique root in the interval (a; b), and the signs of f (a) and f (b) are different.
     The ERC program Trisection in Algorithm 9 is annotated with precondition uniq(f, a, b)
and postcondition uniq(f, a, b) ∧ |b − a| ≤ 2p , as well as loop invariant uniq(f, a, b). Formally,
as ERC does not accept function arguments, the program is defined in ERC({f }, ∅). Given
p, the postcondition guarantees that Trisection indeed returns an approximation to the
root up to error 2p when uniq(f, a, b) holds. Therefore, as p → −∞ the program returns the
root of f . This program is chosen later in Section 7 to be formally proved for its correctness.

Algorithm 9 Trisection : R × R → R in ERC({f }, ∅) for any f : R → R⊥
 1: input a : R, b : R                                                                // uniq(f, a, b)
                                p   p−1
                                             
 2:    while choose b − a ⋖ 2 , 2    ⋖ b − a = 1 do                   // uniq(f, a, b) ∧ b − a > 2p−1
 3:       if choose(f (b/3 + 2 × a/3) × f (b) ⋖ 0, f (a) × f (2 × b/3 + a/3) ⋖ 0) = 1
 4:       then b := 2 × b/3 + a/3
 5:       else a := b/3 + 2 × a/3 end
 6:    end                                                             // uniq(f, a, b) ∧ |b − a| ≤ 2p
 7: return a as p → −∞




5.3. Turing-Completeness. Algorithms 5 and 6 show the existence of a well-formed
command which we abbreviate as
                                       Γ ⊢ z :≡ round(x) ▷ Γ
when Γ(x) = R and Γ(z) = Z that assigns the multi-valued rounding of x into z having its
denotation
              JΓ ⊢ z :≡ round(x) ▷ ΓK σ = {σ[z 7→ k] | σ(x) − 1 < k < σ(x) − 1}.
Vol. 20:2                             EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                   17:33




Furthermore, though it is not available in the term language, the command language of
ERC provides the naı̈ve coercion from integers to reals: There exists a well-formed command
which we write
                                         Γ ⊢ x :≡ real(z) ▷ Γ
when Γ(x) = R and Γ(z) = Z that repeatedly add 1 or −1 in a loop such that
                            JΓ ⊢ x :≡ real(z) ▷ ΓK σ = {σ[x 7→ σ(z)]}.
   ERC being an imperative language providing integers, arithmetical operations on them,
compositions of commands, and general loops, it is type-1 Turing-complete over natural
numbers:

Proposition 5.1. For any type-1 computable (or equivalently µ-recursive) f : Nd ⇀ N,
there exists a well-formed ERC command which we abbreviate as
                                     Γ ⊢ y :≡ f (x1 , · · · , xd ) ▷ Γ
when Γ(y) = Z, Γ(xi ) = Z for each i, such that for all σ ∈ JΓK where (σ(x1 ), · · · , σ(xd )) ∈
dom(f ),
               JΓ ⊢ y :≡ f (x1 , · · · , xd ) ▷ ΓK σ = {σ[y 7→ f (σ(x1 ), · · · , σ(xd ))]}.

Proof. We can construct the command S inductively on the µ-recursiveness of f .

     From the fact that ERC is type-1 Turing-complete, we can automatically ensure many
interesting operations on integers where some of which are necessary to build our (type-
2) Turing-completeness result. Fix a standard numbering of finite sequences (including
the empty sequence ϵ) of integers ζ : N → Z∗ throughout this section. By the type-1
completeness, there are ERC commands for (1) constructing the code of the empty string ϵ,
(2) appending a new tail to a sequence from its code, (3) accessing the tail of a sequence
from its code assuming that the sequence is not empty, and (4) obtaining the length of a
sequence from its code. For any integer variables y, x, x1 , x2 in Γ:
                                     JΓ ⊢ y :≡ ϵ ▷ ΓK σ = {σ[y 7→ ζ −1 (ϵ)]}
                              JΓ ⊢ y :≡ x1 #x2 ▷ ΓK σ = {σ[y 7→ ζ −1 (ζ(σ(x1 ))#σ(x2 ))]}
  JΓ ⊢ y :≡ tail(x) ▷ ΓK σ = {σ[y 7→ m]} if ζ(σ(x)) = a#m for some a ∈ Z∗
                           JΓ ⊢ y :≡ length(x) ▷ ΓK σ = {σ[y 7→ m]} if ζ(σ(x)) has length m
Note that the command for accessing the tail of a sequence y :≡ tail(x) may not well-behave
when the sequence that x represents is the empty sequence. Here, x#y when x ∈ Z∗ and
y ∈ Z denotes the finite sequence of integers where y is appended to x.
    For the last building block of our main theorem, we recall the type-1 characterization of
type-2 machines:

Proposition 5.2. For any type-2 machine computing τ : ZN × · · · × ZN ⇀ ZN , there
exists a total type-1 computable (with regard to the standard numbering of finite sequences)
17:34   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler            Vol. 20:2




τ̄ : Z∗ × · · · × Z∗ → Z∗ such that for any (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) ∈ dom(τ ),
                                               (m)         (m)
                                         (τ̄ (ϕ̄1 , · · · , ϕ̄d ))m∈N
(which can contain the empty sequence) is a chain with regard to the prefix ordering and it
converges to τ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ). Here, ϕ̄(m) ∈ Z∗ denotes the length m prefix of ϕ ∈ ZN .

     The type-1 τ̄ continuously approximates τ in the following sense. If ϕ ∈ dom(τ ), τ̄ tries
to approximate τ (ϕ) using finite approximations of ϕ. The function τ̄ may fail initially due
to for example lack of input precision and return the empty sequence. However, it eventually
returns longer and longer prefixes of τ (ϕ) converging to τ (ϕ) consistently (i.e. monotonically
with regard to the prefix ordering).
Proof. Let us first consider the case where τ is univariate. As stated in [Wei00, Excer-
cise 2.3.12], due to the relation between domain-computability and type-2 computability,
for any partial τ computed by a type-2 machine, there exists a total function T : Z∗ → Z∗
which is monotone with regard to the prefix ordering, approximates τ in the sense that
                                            lim T (ϕ̄(n) ) = τ (ϕ)
                                           n→∞
for each ϕ ∈ dom(τ ), and the set
                               {(u, v) ∈ Z∗ × Z∗ | v is a prefix of T (u)}
is computably enumerable. Let e : N → Z∗ × Z∗ be one computable enumeration. Then, we
can define τ̄ as follows: given ϕ̄(n) , iterate e(0), · · · , e(n) to find (u, v) := e(i) where u is a
prefix of ϕ̄(n) and the length of v is the longest amongst such. If such (u, v) is located, return
v. If there is no prefix of ϕ̄(n) found, return the empty sequence ϵ. This computational
procedure describes the computable function τ̄ .
       Now consider a computable d-variate τ and construct τ̄ . As τ is computable, there exists
a computable τ ′ : ZN ⇀ ZN such that τ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) = τ ′ ⟨ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ⟩ where ϕ := ⟨ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ⟩
is defined by interleaving. By the above proof, there exists τ̄ ′ : Z∗ → Z∗ for τ ′ satisfying the
                                    (n)        (n)
conditions. Given the prefixes ϕ̄1 , · · · , ϕ̄d , we construct ϕ̄(n·d) by interleaving, feed it in
                                                 (n)           (n)
τ ′ , and let it be the return sequence of τ̄ (ϕ̄1 , · · · , ϕ̄d ).

Theorem 5.3. Recall the definitions of computable partial (mutli-valued) functions in
Section 2 and ERC programs realizing them in Definition 4.9.
(1) Every computable partial real function from integers and reals can be realized in ERC0 .
(2) Similarly, every computable partial integer multi-valued function from integers and reals
    can be realized in ERC0 .

     As stated in Proposition 5.1, ERC0 can realize all µ-recursive integer functions, and
consequently also every computable single real number r ∈ R, since the latter is defined
as limit r = limn ϕ(n)/2n for |r − ϕ(n)/2n | ≤ 2−n . Note that also every oracle Turing
machine computable integer function is oracle-recursive; see http://math.stackexchange.
com/questions/2778974. This suggests realizing a type-2 oracle machine computing a real
function f : R → R⊥ according to [Ko91, §2.3] in ERC0 : by replacing any oracle query
Vol. 20:2                                   EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                    17:35




“ϕ(n)” for a 2−n –approximation ϕ(n)/2n to the real argument x ∈ dom(f ) by the ERC0
commands in Section 5.2.4 realizing Round(x × 2n ). However said Round() is multi-valued,
corresponding to a multi-valued oracle ϕ; and for these, oracle Turing computation does not
seem to be known as equivalent to oracle µ-recursiveness. Instead, we present in the sequel
a different proof of Theorem 5.3:

Proof. (1) Without loss of generality, suppose any computable partial f : Rd1 × Zd2 → R⊥
where d1 +d2 = d. By definition, there is a type-2 machine computing τ : ZN ×· · ·×ZN ⇀ ZN
such that for each (x1 , · · · , xd ) ∈ dom(f ) and each ϕi a name of xi , τ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) is defined
and is a name of f (x1 , · · · xd ):
                   |f (x1 , · · · , xd ) − τ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd )(n) · 2−n | ≤ 2−n   holds for all n.
By Propositions 5.1 and 5.2, there exists a well-formed command in ERC such that when
                                                                                        (n)   (n)
x′i , y ′ are integer variables in Γ, for any σ ∈ JΓK such that σ(x′i ) = mi ∈ N a code for ϕ̄i
(w.r.t. the fixed standard numbering ξ),
                              Γ ⊢ y ′ :≡ τ̄ (x′1 , · · · , x′d ) σ = {σ[y ′ 7→ y (n) ]}
                            q                                   y

holds for some y (n) ∈ N which is a code for a finite, possibly empty, prefix of τ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ).
     We claim that the real program in ERC0 in Algorithm 10 realizes f . On its input
variables x1 , · · · , xd , the program prepares integer variables x′1 , · · · , x′d to let each x′i stores
a code of a finite prefix (of say length n) of a name of xi . Starting from the empty sequences
(n = 0), the program keeps appending x′i and computes τ̄ (x′1 , · · · , x′d ) in y ′ which is a finite
prefix (of say length ℓ) of some name of f (x1 , · · · , xd ). The program iterates until the length
ℓ of the obtained prefix y ′ becomes enough to obtain a 2−p approximation to f (x1 , · · · , xd ).
     The variable n increases as the number of iterations. Each state that appears at the
beginning of the n’th iteration satisfies that
                  x′i is (a code for) the length n prefix of some name ϕi of xi                 and

            y ′ is (a code for) the length ℓ prefix of τ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) for some name ϕi of xi
irrelevant to the multi-valuedness of the integer rounding. (Note that though due to
multi-valuedness, ϕi in each annotated assertion does not need to be consistent.)
     Suppose for now that the loop is total. When the loop exits, due to ℓ − 1 ≥ −p and
ℓ > 0 the tail of y ′ , which is y, is the ℓ − 1’th (counting from 0) entry of τ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) for
some names ϕi of xi . Hence, it holds that |f (x1 , · · · , xd ) − y × 2−(ℓ−1) | ≤ 2−(ℓ−1) ≤ 2p where
y × 2−(ℓ−1) is the return value. We conclude that the real program indeed realizes f .
     To prove that the loop is total, we show that for any natural number k, there is a
                                                                       (n(k))            (n(k))
natural number n(k) such that for any names ϕi of xi , τ̄ (ϕ1                 , · · · , ϕd      ) has length
greater than or equal to k. If this is true, the loop terminates after at most n(−p) (or n(1)
if p is non-negative) iterations.
     Recall that A := {(ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) | ϕi is a name of xi } is compact with regard to the
standard topology of Baire space. For each natural number n, define An := {(ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) |
                           (n)         (n)
ϕi is a name of xi ∧ τ̄ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) has length greater than or equal to k} which is the set
17:36   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler                Vol. 20:2




Algorithm 10 A real program in ERC0 realizing f in the proof of Theorem 5.3
  input x1 : R, · · · , xd1 : R, xd1 +1 : Z, · · · , xd : Z
     let x′1 , · · · , x′d , y ′ , y ′′ :≡ ϵ;
     let ℓ, t, n : Z = 0;
     while ℓ ≤ −p ∨       ˆ ℓ ≤ 0 do
                ′
         // xi is a code for the length n prefix of some name ϕi of xi
         // y ′ is a code for the length ℓ prefix of τ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) for some name ϕi of xi
         // append x′i :
         t :≡ round(x1 × 2n );
         x′1 :≡ x′1 #t;
          ..
           .
           t :≡ round(xd1 × 2n );
           x′d1 :≡ x′d1 #t;
           x′d1 +1 :≡ x′d1 +1 #xd1 +1 ; · · · ; x′d :≡ x′d #xd ;
           n := n + 1;
           // x′i is a code for the length n prefix of some name ϕi of xi
           y ′ :≡ τ̄ (x′1 , · · · , x′d );
           ℓ :≡ length(y ′ );
           // y ′ is a code for the length ℓ prefix of τ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) for some names ϕi of xi
     end;
     // y ′ is a code for a length ℓ prefix of τ (ϕ1 , · · · , ϕd ) for some names ϕi of xi and
     // ℓ > 0 and ℓ − 1 ≥ −p
     y : R = 0;
     y ′′ :≡ tail(y ′ );                                                // ℓ > 0 ensures tail(y ′ ) does not fail
     y :≡ real(y ′′ );                                       // |f (x1 , · · · , xd ) − y × 2−(ℓ−1) | ≤ 2−(ℓ−1) ≤ 2p
  return y × 2−(ℓ−1) as p → −∞


of names whose length n prefix is enough to make τ̄ returns length k prefix of τ . Note that
An is open and by the convergence of τ̄ , (An )n∈N forms a countable open cover of A. The
compactness gives us a finite subcover of An and we can choose the maximum index of the
finite subcover to be n(k).
(2) The integer multi-valued function case can be proved similarly except that now we only
need to iterate until ℓ > 0 and return tail(y ′ ).
Remark 5.4. The completeness of WhileCC*’s algebraic semantics [TZ04] is obtained in
a similar way: using nondeterminism to obtain discrete approximation then proceed with
ordinary computation. However, their countable choice construct is not necessary for our
case as we only consider real numbers; using the total order of reals, we can rely on our
finite choice construct to extract names.
    ERC defines integer multi-valued functions but not a real multi-valued function. Real
programs are forced to take limit operations and compute single-valued real numbers. This
Vol. 20:2                              EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                   17:37




is our design choice that can be chosen differently. Here, we state a possible alternative and
explain our choice:

Remark 5.5. One straightforward way to allow real multi-valued functions is to ease our
typing rule such that we let the program
                             P := input x1 : τ1 , x2 : τ2 , · · · , xd : τd
                                    S
                                  return t
have type τ1 × · · · τd → R if there is a context Γ′ such that
                     x1 : τ1 , x2 : τ2 , · · · , xd : τd ⊢ S ▷ Γ′   and   Γ′ ⊢ t : R .
We let its denotation be JP K := JtK† ◦ JSK : Jτ1 K × · · · × Jτd K → P(R⊥ ) as it was an integer
program. From Lemmas 4.3 and 4.6, it can be seen immediately that the denotations of
such real programs are computable multi-valued functions. We can also extend the notion
of realization in Definition 4.9 accordingly.
     However, this extension does not carry the completeness in Theorem 5.3 over. Recall that
the denotations of programs are finite multi-valued functions. Hence, a computable infinite
multi-valued function is realizable in ERC only if it admits point-wise finite refinement that
is computable. In the integer case, it was feasible as any infinite integer multi-valued function
admits point-wise finite refinement. (Recall Fact 2.4.) However, this does not work for real
multi-valued functions. That means when we extend ERC with real multi-valued functions
as above, we end up with a restricted completeness theorem. As easing the restriction
as above is straightforward, we choose to keep the restriction and achieve a more natural
completeness theorem.



                             6. Logic of Exact Real Computation
In this section, we devise a specification language and based on the language, devise an
extended Hoare logic for formal verification of ERC programs. Section 6.1 proposes a
three-sorted structure which we use to rigorously specify (multi-valued) functions with real
arguments in Section 6.2. It is carefully designed to be rich enough to allow arguing about
computations in ERC yet restricted such as to assert logical decidability as a guarantee to
formal program verification; recall Remark 1.1. Section 6.3 extends the classical Hoare logic
which is sound with regard to our denotational semantics.


6.1. Three-Sorted Structure with Decidable Theory.

Definition 6.1. The Structure of ERC0 is the three-sorted structure S0 combining the
Kleene Algebra (K, false, true, unknown, ∧     ˆ, ∨
                                                  ˆ, ¬
                                                     ˆ ) with Presburger Arithmetic (Z, 0, 1, +, −, ≤
, 2Z, 3Z, 4Z, . . .) and ordered field (R, 0, 1, +, −, ×, <). Available inter-sort functions are the
binary precision embedding ı : Z ∋ p 7→ 2p ∈ R and its partial half-inverse ⌊log2 ◦ abs⌋ :
17:38   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler   Vol. 20:2




R \ {0} → Z. Here kZ denotes the predicate on Z which is true precisely for all integer
multiples of k ∈ N.
    The (specification) language of ERC0 is the first-order language L0 over the signature
of the structure S0 ; and the theory of ERC0 is the first-order theory T0 containing true
statements of L0 in S0 .

     We take the inequality on Z as non-strict ≤, but that on R strict < as in [Mar17]. This
classical predicate <⊆ R × R is the classical order relation of real numbers and is not to be
confused with anything computational. Another important note is that the symbol ⊥ in our
denotational semantics does not appear in the structure of ERC.
     Theorem 6.2(a) shows that the theory T0 is decidable. This applies for example to
preconditions and postconditions or loop invariants of ERC0 programs; see Lemma 6.4 and
Remark 6.9. This is a significant advantage of ERC, compared to traditional programming
languages for discrete data: Classical While programs over integers with multiplication, for
instance, do suffer from Gödel undecidability [Coo78, §6].

Theorem 6.2.
(a) The Theory T0 of ERC0 is decidable.
(b) T0 is also ‘model complete’ in that it admits elimination of quantifiers up to one (by
    choice either existential or universal) block ranging over integers.
(c) Each of the following expansions destroys the decidability of the first-order theory of the
    structure S0 :
    • expanding with integer multiplication
    • expanding with the unary predicate Z on R, or with the standard coercion Z ,→ R
    • replacing the binary precision embedding ı with its unary counterpart ȷ : N+ ∋ n 7→
       1/n ∈ R
    • expanding simultaneously with the real exponential and sine function and with tran-
       scendental constants π and ln 2

Proof. (c) Including integer multiplication recovers Peano arithmetic and Gödel undecid-
ability via Robinson’s Theorem [Rob59]. A unary predicate Z on R allows to express
integer multiplication via the reals; similarly, for (any total extension of) the unary precision
embedding ȷ. Finally, the real transcendental functions and constants make the theory
undecidable according to Richardson’s Theorem [Ric68].

(a)+(b) A celebrated result of van den Dries [Dri85] extends classical Tarski-Seidenberg
quantifier elimination from the first-order theory of real-closed fields to the expanded
structure
                           (R, 0, 1, +, −, ×, <, 2kZ : k ∈ N, 2⌊log2 ◦ abs⌋ )                    (6.1)

with axiomatized additional predicates 2kZ , k ∈ N, and truncation function to binary powers
2⌊log2 ◦ abs⌋ , see also [AY07].
Vol. 20:2                                 EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                               17:39




    Note that both the real-closed field (R, 0, 1, +, −, ×, <) and Presburger Arithmetic can
be embedded into the expanded structure from Equation (6.1); the latter interpreted as its
multiplicative variant (2Z , 1, 2, ×, <, 2kZ : k ∈ N) is called Skolem Arithmetic [Bés02]:
• Replace quantifiers over Skolem integers with real quantifiers subject to the predicate 2kZ
  for k := 1;
• Consider ı : Z → R as the restricted identity id2Z in R.
Then every formula φ with or without parameters in our two-sorted structure translates
signature by signature to an equivalent one φ̃ over the expanded theory where quantifiers
can be eliminated, yielding equivalent decidable ψ̃ (which may involve binary truncation
2⌊log2 ◦ abs⌋ ).
     To translate this back to some equivalent ψ over the two-sorted structure, while re-
introducing only one type of quantifier, observe that for real x:

                        x ∈ 2kZ ⇔ ∃z ∈ Z. z ∈ kZ ∧ x = ı(z);
                        x ̸∈ 2kZ ⇔ ∃z ∈ Z. z ∈ kZ ∧ ı(z) < x < ı(z + k) .

Similarly, replace real binary truncation 2⌊log2 ◦ abs(x)⌋ with “ı(z)” for some/every z ∈ Z s.t.
ı(z) ≤ |x| < ı(z) + 1 in case x > 0, with 0 otherwise.
     Since the Kleene Algebra K as the third sort is finite, it does not affect decidability.



6.2. Specification Language. We define a specification language for each ERC(F, G) by
expanding the structure of ERC0 as follows:

Definition 6.3. The structure of ERC(F, G) is the expansion S(F, G) of S0 with the graphs
of f ∈ F and g ∈ G as new relations:
• Graphf := {(x1 , · · · , xd ; y) | f (x1 , · · · , xd ) = y ̸= ⊥} and
• Graphg := {(x1 , · · · , xd ; y) | y ∈ g(x1 , · · · , xd ) ∧ ⊥ ̸∈ g(x1 , · · · , xd )}.
The (specification) language of ERC(F, G), which we write L(F, G) is the first-order language
L0 extended with the new relation symbols. The theory of ERC(F, G), which we write
T (F, G), is the sentences in the language that is true in S(F, G).

     Let us write simply S, T , and L when the underlying F and G are obvious or not so
relevant. Though, formally, we only add graphs of the (multivalued) functions, we may still
have their function applications as appropriate abbreviations.
     The following lemma shows that our specification logic is adequate for the term language
of ERC:

Lemma 6.4. For each well-typed term Γ ⊢ t : τ in ERC, its denotation JΓ ⊢ t : τ K : JΓK →
P(Jτ K⊥ ) is definable in L in the sense that there is a formula ψ(x1 , · · · , xd ; y) defining the
graph of the denotation (as in Definition 6.3). We represent a fixed length array, of say
length d, with d variables x = (x(0) , · · · , x(d−1) ) in an obvious way.
17:40   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler        Vol. 20:2




Proof. Let X, Yi , Z ∈ {Jτ K | τ is a data type}. Suppose fi : X → P((Yi )⊥ ) and g : Y1 ×
· · · × Yd → P(Z⊥ ) are definable partial multi-valued functions where ψi (x; yi ) defines fi and
ψ(y1 , · · · , yd ; z) defines g. Then, its composition g † ◦ ⟨f1 , · · · , fd ⟩ : X → P(Z⊥ ) is definable
by
                 ψ(x; z) :≡ ∃y1 , · · · , yd . ψ1 (x; y1 ) ∧ · · · ∧ ψd (x; yd ) ∧ ψ(y1 , · · · , yd ; z) .
Furthermore, if a partial function f : X → Z⊥ is definable by ψ(x; z), its embedding f ‡ is
definable by the same ψ.
    Hence, we only need to check the nontrivial cases, the definability of primitive functions
that are absent in the structure ERC: (1) choose, (2) Kond, and (3) proj:
(1) See that choosen : Kn → Z is definable by
          ψ(x1 , · · · , xn ; y) :≡ (y = 0 ∧ x1 = true) ∨ · · · ∨ (y = n − 1 ∧ xn−1 = true) .
(2) Suppose ψb (x; y) defines b : X → P(K⊥ ), ψf (x; y) defines f : X → P(R⊥ ), and ψg (x; y)
    defines g : X → P(R⊥ ). Then, the composition Kond†1 ◦ ⟨b, f, g⟩ is definable by
                                        
ψ(x; z) :≡ ψb (x; true) ⇒ ∃y. ψf (x; y)
                                        
         ∧ ψb (x; false) ⇒ ∃y. ψg (x; y)
          ∧ ψb (x; unknown)
                                                                                              
               ⇒ ∃y. ψf (x; y) ∧ ψg (x; y) ∧ ∀y1 , y2 . ψf (x; y1 ) ∧ ψg (x; y2 ) ⇒ y1 = y2
                                                                                                  
        ∧ (ψb (x; true) ∧ ψf (x; z)) ∨ (ψb (x; false) ∧ ψg (x; z)) ∨ (ψb (x; unknown) ∧ ψf (x; z)) .
(3) The partial projection map proj : Rd × Z → R⊥ is defined by
        ψ(x, k; y) :≡ 0 ≤ k < d ∧ (k = 0 ⇒ y = x(0) ) ∧ · · · ∧ (k = d − 1 ⇒ y = x(d−1) ) .
    Note that when k is an index out of range, there is no y satisfying ψ(x, k; y) since
    proj(x, k, y) = ⊥.

Definition 6.5. For a well-typed term Γ ⊢ t : τ in ERC, let us write LΓ ⊢ t : τ M for the
formula defining JΓ ⊢ t : τ K according to Lemma 6.4.

We write simply LtM for LΓ ⊢ t : τ M when the particular context Γ is obvious or irrelevant.
We let the free variables representing the input values in LtM be synchronized with Γ and
omit them in the notation; i.e., LtM(y) := Lx1 : τ1 , · · · , xd : τd ⊢ t : τ M(x1 , · · · , xd ; y).
    Note however that when we go beyond the term language of ERC0 , there are real
functions that can be defined in the programming language but not in our specification
language:

Example 6.6. The restricted exponential function exp : I = [0; 1] → R is uniquely
characterized by the following formula:
                      ∀x, y ∈ I. x + y ∈ I ⇒ exp(x + y) = exp(x) · exp(y)                             (6.2)
                             ∀x, y ∈ I. | exp(x) − exp(y)| ≤ 3 · |x − y|
                                                            X
                              exp(1) = lim(1 + 1/n)n =            1/n!                                (6.3)
                                             n                      n
Vol. 20:2                          EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                   17:41




The first line is the well-known functional equation, and the second one captures Lipschitz-
continuity.
    Although exp can be realized as in Section 5.2.2, the defining Equation (6.3) exceeds
the first-order language of ERC by involving the transcendental constant e, which cannot
be characterized algebraically.

     In other words, our logic is not expressive enough for the command language of ERC.
Propositional formulae in the specification language can only define semi-algebraic subsets of
Euclidean space; and, according to Tarski-Seidenberg, real quantification does not increase
the expressive power. Integer quantification can define countable unions of semi-algebraic
subsets, but no more according to Theorem 6.2(b). According to Lindemann-Weierstrass,
the graph of exp : [0; 1] → R is no countable union of semi-algebraic Euclidean sets, hence
impossible to define in S0 .
                                 
     The expansion S {exp}, ∅ on the other hand makes exp trivial to define—but its
first-order theory may violate decidability. Such trade-offs are unavoidable according to
Remark 1.1. Nonetheless, specification and formal verification may suffice with less than
definability of the function under consideration: applications tend to be interested in solutions
that satisfy given algebraic properties expressible in ERC—such as the exponential functional
Equation (6.2)—but do not necessarily make them unique, particularly transcendental or
multi-valued ones.


6.3. Hoare Logic. Hoare logic is a well-known tool for formally proving the total correctness
of a program and agreement with the problem specification. The following considerations
are guided by [Rey09, §3], adapted and extended to ERC with its three-sorted structure and
multi-valued semantics. Both complicate matters since, for instance, a real guard variable
in a while loop may strictly decrease during each iteration yet remain bounded forever;
furthermore merely evaluating the loop condition can cause lack of termination when real
equality occurs; see Remark 6.10. Since our language is simple imperative, we adopt the
following notion of total correctness specification:

Definition 6.7. For a well-typed command S in ERC(F, G) with Γ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′ , a (total
correctness) specification
                                Γ ⊨ ϕ S ψ ▷ Γ′
                                       

is defined by
                           ∀σ ∈ JΓK . ⊥ ̸∈ JSK σ ∧ ∀δ ∈ JSK σ. ψ(δ).
Here, ϕ, ψ are formulae in the specification language of ERC(F, G). In the precondition
ϕ, only the variables in Γ appear free and in the postcondition ψ, only the variables in Γ′
appear free. The notation says, for any σ ∈ JΓK that satisfies ϕ, (i) ⊥ ̸∈ JSK σ and (ii) any
δ ∈ JSK σ satisfies ψ.

Note that the definition of our specification does not publish any obligation to S when the
precondition ϕ is not met.
17:42   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler   Vol. 20:2




Definition 6.8. A Hoare triple for ERC(F, G) is of the form Γ ⊢ ϕ S ψ ▷ Γ′ where S
                                                                           

is a well-typed command in ERC(F, G) such that Γ ⊢ S ▷ Γ′ , and ϕ, ψ are formulae in the
specification language of ERC(F, G) such that only the variables in Γ are free in ϕ and only
the variables in Γ′ are free in ψ. Hoare logic of ERC(F, G) is a formal system which consists
of the inference rules and axioms for constructing Hoare triples defined in Figure 3.

     The purpose of (Hoare) logic is to replace semantic arguments with formal proofs:
sequences of purely syntactic manipulations, starting with the axioms and following certain
inference rules, that for example, a computer can verify. Classical Hoare logic contains one
exception:

Remark 6.9. The rule of consequence for precondition-strengthening and postcondition-
weakening
                     Γ ⊢ ϕ′ S ψ ′ ▷ Γ′
                               
                                          ϕ ⇒ ϕ′ and ψ ′ ⇒ ψ
                      Γ ⊢ ϕ S ψ ▷ Γ′
                               

depends on the semantic side-conditions ϕ ⇒ ϕ′ and ψ ′ ⇒ ψ which may or may not be feasible
to verify algorithmically. Over integers, algorithmic verifiability can fail according to Gödel
[Coo78, §6], but not in our specification language of ERC0 according to Theorem 6.2(a).

Remark 6.10.
(1) In the axiom for assignments, recall from Definition 6.5 that the precondition ∃w. LtM(w)
    ensures that the denotation of t is well-defined. And, ∀w. LtM(w) ⇒ ψ[w/x] says that for
    each value in the denotation of t, ψ holds when we replace the variable x with the value.
(2) In the while loop case,
     (a) the formula I is the loop invariant and the term V is the loop variant. The term L
         is some invariant quantity that bounds by how much V decreases in each iteration.
     (b) ξ, ξ ′ are ghost variables that do not appear in Γ. They can be understood as
         meta-level universally quantified variables.
     (c) The side condition says (i) each loop decreases V by some positive invariant quantity
         L; (ii) as long as I holds, the evaluation of b is either true or false (but not unknown);
         and (iii) when V is negative, it is guaranteed that the evaluation of b is false.
(3) In the rule of if conditionals, the precondition (LbM(true) ∨ LbM(false)) ∧ ¬LbM(unknown)
    says that the evaluation of b is either true or false (but not unknown).
(4) In the rule of array assignments, update(x, i, w, y) says x = (x(0) , · · · , x(d−1) ) is updated
    to y = (y(0) , · · · , y(d−1) ) by assigning w at 0 ≤ i < d.

Theorem 6.11. The Hoare logic of ERC(F, G) is sound; i.e., for any Hoare triple Γ ⊢
  ϕ S ψ ▷ Γ′ , it holds that Γ ⊨ ϕ S ψ ▷ Γ′ .
                                 


Proof. See Appendix A.
Vol. 20:2                           EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                     17:43




                           Figure 3: The Hoare logic of ERC(F, G)

            Γ ⊢ ϕ′ S ψ ′ ▷ Γ′
                   
                              ϕ ⇒ ϕ′ and ψ ′ ⇒ ψ
            Γ ⊢ ϕ S ψ ▷ Γ′
                                                                        
                                                                 Γ ⊢ ψ skip ψ ▷ Γ

                      
                   Γ ⊢ ∃w. LtM(w) ∧ ∀w. LtM(w) ⇒ ψ[w/x]          x := t { ψ} ▷ Γ

                          Γ ⊢ { ArrPre(ψ, x, m, t)} x[m] := t { ψ} ▷ Γ

                                                              
             Γ ⊢ ∃w. LtM(w) ∧ ∀w. LtM(w) ⇒ ψ[w/x] let x : τ = t ψ ▷ Γ, x : τ
                                                  
                        Γ ⊢ { ϕ} S1 { θ} ▷ Γ1 Γ1 ⊢ θ S2 { ψ} ▷ Γ2
                                               
                                  Γ ⊢ ϕ S1 ; S2 ψ ▷ Γ2

            Γ ⊢ { ϕ ∧ LbM(true)} S1 { ψ} ▷ Γ1      Γ ⊢ { ϕ ∧ LbM(false)} S2 { ψ} ▷ Γ2
  Γ ⊢ { ϕ ∧ (LbM(true) ∨ LbM(false)) ∧ ¬LbM(unknown)} if b then S1 else S2 end { ψ} ▷ Γ

       Γ, ξ, ξ ′ : R ⊢ {LbM(true) ∧ I ∧ V = ξ ∧ L = ξ ′} S {I ∧ V ≤ ξ − ξ ′ ∧ L = ξ ′} ▷ Γ′′
                       Γ ⊢ { I} while b do S end { I ∧ LbM(false)} ▷ Γ


 The rule for loops has the side conditions:
                   I ∧ LbM(true) ⇒ L > 0 ,
                               I ⇒ (LbM(true) ∨ LbM(false)) ∧ ¬LbM(unknown) ,
                     I ∧ V ≤ 0 ⇒ ∀k. LbM(k) ⇒ k = false , and
                            ξ, ξ ′ do not appear free in I, V, L .
 where L and V are real-valued.

 In the case of array assignment ArrPre(ψ, x, m, t) is defined as follows:
                                                  
     ArrPre(ψ, x, m, t) :≡ ∃i, w. LmM(i) ∧ LtM(w)
                             ∧ ∀i. (LmM(i) ⇒ 0 ≤ i < d)
                             ∧ ∀i, w. (LmM(i) ∧ LtM(w) ∧ ∀y. update(x, i, w, y) ⇒ ψ[y/x])
 assuming Γ ⊢ x[m] := t ▷ Γ and Γ ⊢ x : R[d] where
    update(x, i, w, y) :≡ 0 ≤ i < d ∧ ((y(0) = x(0) ∧ i ̸= 0) ∨ (y(0) = w ∧ i = 0))
                          ∧ · · · ∧ ((y(d−1) = x(d−1) ∧ i ̸= d − 1) ∨ (y(d−1) = w ∧ i = d − 1))
17:44   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler        Vol. 20:2




               7. Example Formal Verification in Exact Real Computation
The present section picks up from Section 5.2.6 to illustrate formal verification in ERC.
To emphasize, our purpose here is not to actually establish correctness of the long-known
Trisection method, but to demonstrate the extended Hoare logic from Section 6.3 using a toy
example. Since Trisection relies on the Intermediate Value Theorem, any correctness proof
must make full use of real (as opposed to floating point, rational, or algebraic) numbers.
    Let us define some abbreviations such that the program in Algorithm 9 becomes of the
form
                             input a : R, b : R S return a as p → −∞.

           t̃1 :≡    b − a ⋖ 2p , t̃2 := 2p−1 ⋖ b − a
           t1 :≡     f (b/3 + 2 × a/3) × f (b) ⋖ 0 , t2 :≡ f (a) × f (2 × b/3 + a/3) ⋖ 0
          b1 :≡      choose(t̃1 , t̃2 ) = 1, b2 := choose(t1 , t2 ) = 1
           S   :≡    while b1 do S1 end
          S1   :≡    if b2 then S2 else S3 end
          S2   :≡    b := 2 × b/3 + a/3
          S3   :≡    a := b/3 + 2 × a/3
    We work with T ({f }, ∅) which contains sentences saying that f is a continuous function.
We want to verify that the program’s denotation at its inputs a, b which isolate a root of f
uniquely with a sign change:
          uniq(f, a, b) :≡ cont(f, a, b) ∧ f (a) · f (b) < 0 ∧ ∃!x. a < x < b ∧ f (x) = 0 .
Considering the limit taken at the end of every real program, we need to prove the specifica-
tion:
                                                                              ′
      Γ ⊨ p = p′ ∧ uniq(f, a, b) S ∃!z. f (z) = 0 ∧ a < z < b ∧ |a − z| ≤ 2p ▷ Γ′
                                    

where Γ = p, p′ : Z, a, b : R and Γ′ = p, p′ : Z, a, b : R. The ghost variable p′ captures the
initial value that the variable p stores, considering that the value p stores may throughout
the computation (though it does not in this specific example.)
       To simplify our presentation, let us write t1 , t2 , t̃1 , t̃2 as valid formulae in our specification
language where their occurrences of ⋖ are implicitly replaced with <. See that Lb1 M(true) ⇔
t̃2 , Lb1 M(false) ⇔ t̃1 , ¬Lb1 M(unknown), Lb2 M(true) ⇔ t2 , Lb2 M(false) ⇔ t1 , and ¬Lb2 M(unknown)
hold. Let us define I := p = p′ ∧ uniq(f, a, b) as a candidate for the loop invariant,
V := b − a − 2p−1 as a candidate for the loop variant, L := 2p−2 be a candidate for a lower
bound decrements, P̃ := t̃2 ∧ I ∧ V = ξ ∧ L = ξ ′ , and Q̃ := I ∧ V ≤ ξ − ξ ′ ∧ L = ξ ′ in our
specification language with variables ξ, ξ ′ of the sort R. Let ∆ := p, p′ : Z, a, b, ξ, ξ ′ : R.
       From the axiom for assignments, we have the triples:
                                                                                           
          ∆ ⊢ ∃ω. La/3 + 2 × b/3M(ω) ∧ ∀ω. La/3 + 2 × b/3M(ω) ⇒ Q̃[ω/b] S2 Q̃ ▷ ∆
                                                                                           
          ∆ ⊢ ∃ω. L2 × a/3 + b/3M(ω) ∧ ∀ω. L2 × a/3 + .b/3M(ω) ⇒ Q̃[ω/a] S3 Q̃ ▷ ∆
Vol. 20:2                             EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                 17:45




See that we can apply the rule of precondition weakening to get the following triples derived:
                                                                             
   ∆ ⊢ Q̃[(a/3 + 2 × b/3)/b] C2 Q̃ ▷ ∆, ∆ ⊢ Q̃[(2 × a/3 + b/3)/a] C3 Q̃ ▷ ∆.
     When we unwrap abbreviations, we can verify the following equivalences:
            Q̃[(2 × a/3 + b/3)/a] ⇔ p = p′ ∧ uniq(f, (2 × a/3 + b/3), b)
                                  ∧ b − (2 × a/3 + b/3) − 2p−1 ≤ ξ − ξ ′
                                  ∧ 2p−2 = ξ ′
                          P̃ ∧ t1 ⇔ p = p′ ∧ uniq(f, a, b) ∧ f (b/3 + 2 × a/3) × f (b) < 0
                                  ∧ 2p−1 < b − a ∧ b − a − 2p−1 = ξ
                                  ∧ 2p−2 = ξ ′
    Due to the intermediate value theorem, if an interval (a; b) contains a root of f uniquely,
and if f (x) × f (y) < 0 for a ≤ x < y ≤ b, then (x; y) also contains the root of f uniquely.
Hence, P̃ ∧ t1 ⇒ Q̃[(2 × a/3 + b/3)/a] holds. And, similarly, P̃ ∧ t2 ⇒ Q̃[(a/3 + 2 × b/3)/b]
holds.
    Therefore, by the rule of precondition strengthening on the triples of S2 , S3 , and the
rule for conditionals, we get the triple:
             ∆ ⊢ t̃2 ∧ I ∧ V = ξ ∧ L = ξ ′ S1 I ∧ (V ≤ ξ − ξ ′ ) ∧ L = ξ ′ ▷ ∆
                                              

The side-conditions of the rule for while loops are quite trivial. Hence, assuming that they
are proven, we apply the rule of while loops, and we get the following triple:
                                   Γ ⊢ I S I ∧ t̃2 ▷ Γ′
                                             

Using the rule of pre/postcondition strengthening/weakening, we can get the originally
desired specification.


                               8. Conclusion and Future work
We have formalized an imperative programming language for exact real number computation.
Its domain-theoretic denotational semantics, based on the Plotkin powerdomain modelling
multi-valued computations, is carefully designed to be computable and complete, matching
the intuition of operating on continuous data exactly without rounding errors and in
agreement with (proofs in) calculus. This enables a natural approach to formal program
verification by adding real number axioms to Hoare logic.
     The following considerations naturally suggest future further investigations:
• Computational Cost: After the design of an algorithm comes its analysis, in terms of
  computational cost as a quantitative indicator of its practical performance. For realistic
  predictions, real complexity theory [Ko91, Wei03] employs bit-cost, as opposed to unit cost
  common in algebraic complexity theory [BCS97]. In [BH98, Definition 2.4] it is suggested
  that a logarithmic cost measure where each operation is supposed to take time according
  to the binary length of the integer (part of the real) to be processed. More accurate
17:46   Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler   Vol. 20:2




  predictions take into account the precision parameter p for real programs and for real
  number comparisons “x ⋖ y” the logarithm of the difference |x − y|.
• Full Mixed Data Types: ERC as introduced here formalizes computing with data
  types Z, R, and K as counterparts to mathematical Z, R, K where K is permitted only for
  expressions and local variables. A future extension will include also (multi-)functions with
  K type arguments and return values as well as arrays and a dedicated limit operator.
• Explicit Limit Operator: Constructing real numbers as the limits of converging
  sequences is done only at the level of programs in ERC. It was our design choice to separate
  the term language of ERC with loops and of course limits. A direction of extending our
  framework to allow constructing a limit within user programs as a term has been also
  investigated [BPS20] where the authors suggest an expression-based programming language
  called Clerical that provides an explicit limit operator. Its prototype implementation can
  be found in [BPS17].
• Multi-valued Real Functions: The present version of ERC formalizes computing
  mappings from reals to integers in the multi-valued sense because any single-valued, and
  necessarily continuous [Wei00, Theorems 4.3.1+3.2.11], function with connected domain
  and discrete range must be constant. On the other hand, computing real values is
  deliberately restricted to the single-valued case. Defining approximate computation of
  real multi-valued functions is delicate and still under exploration [BMR18, Kon18].
• Functional s and Operators: The program in Algorithm 9 mimics a functional that
  receives a continuous function f as an argument, accessible by point-wise black box
  evaluation. Extending ERC with function arguments enriched with quantitative continuity
  information, such as a modulus of continuity [KC12], is necessary to extend Theorem 5.3
  (Turing-completeness of ERC) from functions to functionals.
• Automated Formal Verification: The decidability of the theory of the base language
  ERC0 according to Theorem 6.2 includes its complete (and elegant) axiomatization:
  Guaranteed to yield convenient automated formal verification. This includes formalizing
  ERC itself in a formal system for example in the Coq proof assistant [KST20, STT21] and
  further development of annotated ERC and verification condition extraction mechanisms.
• Continuous Data Types beyond the Reals: Real computability theory has been ex-
  tended to topological T0 spaces, real complexity theory to co-Polish spaces [KSZ16, Sch04].
  Current and future works similarly extend ERC to continuous data types beyond real num-
  bers/functions, such as the Grassmannian, tensors [SAL+ 18] and groups [SZ18]. As hinted
  in Remark 5.4, this may require extending our language with countable nondeterminism
  for the extended language to be complete as well.


                                       Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (grants NRF-
2017R1E1A1A03071032 and NRF-2017R1D1A1B05031658), by the International Research
& Development Program of the Korean Ministry of Science and ICT
Vol. 20:2                             EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                       17:47




(grant NRF-2016K1A3A7A03950702), by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 731143, and by
the German Research Foundation (DFG) Grant MU 1801/5-1.
    We thank Andrej Bauer, Cyril Cohen, Jeehoon Kang, Johannes Kanig, Alex Simpson,
and Hongseok Yang for seminal discussions. Anonymous referees have provided valuable
feedback to an earlier version. We would like to thank Holger Thies for constructive comments
on this work and proofreading.
    A preliminary version of this work was submitted as a part of the first author’s PhD
thesis [Par21].


                                            References
[AJ95]   Samson Abramsky and Achim Jung. Domain theory. In Handbook of Logic in Computer Science,
         volume III, pages 1–168. Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, 1995.
[AO19]   Krzysztof R Apt and Ernst-Rüdiger Olderog. Fifty years of hoare’s logic. Formal Aspects of
         Computing, 31(6):751–807, 2019. doi:10.1007/s00165-019-00501-3.
[AY07]   Jeremy Avigad and Yimu Yin. Quantifier elimination for the reals with a predicate for the powers
         of two. Theoretical Computer Science, 370(1-3):48–59, 2007. doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2006.10.005.
[BC90]   Hans Boehm and Robert Cartwright. Exact Real Arithmetic: Formulating real numbers as
         functions. In Research Topics in Functional Programming, pages 43––64. Addison-Wesley Longman
         Publishing Co., Inc., USA, 1990.
[BCS97]  Peter Bürgisser, Michael Clausen, and Mohammad Amin Shokrollahi. Algebraic complexity
         theory, volume 315 of Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften. Springer-Verlag Berlin
         Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1997.
[BCSS98] Lenore Blum, Felipe Cucker, Michael Shub, and Steven Smale. Complexity and real computation.
         Springer, New York, NY, 1998. doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-0701-6.
[Bés02] Alexis Bés. A survey of arithmetical definability. Soc. Math. Belgique, A tribute to Maurice
         Boffa:1–54, 2002.
[BFM09] Sylvie Boldo, Jean-Christophe Filliâtre, and Guillaume Melquiond. Combining Coq and Gappa for
         certifying floating-point programs. In Jacques Carette, Lucas Dixon, Claudio Sacerdoti Coen, and
         Stephen M. Watt, editors, Intelligent Computer Mathematics, pages 59–74, Berlin, Heidelberg,
         2009. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-02614-0_10.
[BH98]   Vasco Brattka and Peter Hertling. Feasible real random access machines. Journal of Complexity,
         14(4):490–526, 1998. doi:10.1006/jcom.1998.0488.
[Bla]    Jens Blanck. cdar – Reals based on Centred Dyadic Approximations. https://github.com/
         jensblanck/cdar.
[BM11]   Sylvie Boldo and Guillaume Melquiond. Flocq: A unified library for proving floating-point
         algorithms in Coq. In 2011 IEEE 20th Symposium on Computer Arithmetic, pages 243–252. IEEE,
         2011. doi:10.1109/ARITH.2011.40.
[BMR18] Franz Brausse, Norbert Müller, and Robert Rettinger. Intensionality and multi-valued limits.
         In Proc. 15th International Conference on Computability and Complexity in Analysis (CCA),
         page 11, 2018.
[BPS17]  Andrej Bauer, Sewon Park, and Alex Simpson. Clerical. https://github.com/andrejbauer/
         clerical, 2017.
[BPS20]  Andrej Bauer, Sewon Park, and Alex Simpson. Clerical: an imperative language for verified real-
         number computation. In Proc. 17th International Conference on Computability and Complexity
         in Analysis (CCA), pages 22–23, 2020.
17:48     Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler     Vol. 20:2




[Bra95]   Vasco Brattka. Computable selection in analysis. In Proc. of the Workshop on Computability and
          Complexity in Analysis, Informatik Berichte, FernUniversit at Hagen, volume 190, pages 125–138,
          1995.
[Bra03]   Vasco Brattka. The emperor’s new recursiveness: The epigraph of the exponential function in
          two models of computability. In Masami Ito and Teruo Imaoka, editors, Words, Languages &
          Combinatorics III, pages 63–72, Singapore, 2003. World Scientific Publishing. ICWLC 2000,
          Kyoto, Japan, March 14–18, 2000. doi:10.1142/9789812704979_0005.
[BVS93]   Stephen Brookes and Kathryn Van Stone. Monads and comonads in intensional semantics.
          Technical report, Carnegie-Mellon University Pittsburgh PA Department of Computer Science,
          1993.
[CGC+ 20] Pieter Collins, Luca Geretti, Alberto Casagrande, Ivan Zapreev, and Sanja Zivanovic. Ariadne.
          http://www.ariadne-cps.org/, 2005-20.
[Coo78]   Stephen A Cook. Soundness and completeness of an axiom system for program verification. SIAM
          Journal on Computing, 7(1):70–90, 1978. doi:10.1137/0207005.
[DGE13] Pietro Di Gianantonio and Abbas Edalat. A language for differentiable functions. In Frank
          Pfenning, editor, Foundations of Software Science and Computation Structures, pages 337–352,
          Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-37075-5_22.
[Dri85]   Lou van den Dries. The field of reals with a predicate for the powers of two. Manuscripta
          mathematica, 54:187–195, 1985. doi:10.1007/BF01171706.
[EE00]    Abbas Edalat and Martın Hötzel Escardó. Integration in real PCF. Information and Computation,
          160(1-2):128–166, 2000.
[ES14]    Martı́n Hötzel Escardó and Alex Simpson. Abstract datatypes for real numbers in type theory. In
          Gilles Dowek, editor, Rewriting and Typed Lambda Calculi, pages 208–223, Cham, 2014. Springer
          International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-08918-8_15.
[Esc96]   Martı́n Hötzel Escardó. PCF extended with real numbers. Theoretical Computer Science, 162:79–
          115, 1996. doi:10.1016/0304-3975(95)00250-2.
[FP13]    Jean-Christophe Filliâtre and Andrei Paskevich. Why3 — Where programs meet provers. In
          Matthias Felleisen and Philippa Gardner, editors, Programming Languages and Systems, pages 125–
          128, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-37036-6_8.
[Her96]   Peter Hertling. Topological complexity with continuous operations. Journal of Complexity, 12:315–
          338, 1996. doi:10.1006/jcom.1996.0021.
[Her99]   Peter Hertling. A real number structure that is effectively categorical. Mathematical Logic
          Quarterly, 45(2):147–182, 1999. doi:10.1002/malq.19990450202.
[Hoa69]   C. A. R. Hoare. An axiomatic basis for computer programming. Commun. ACM, 12(10):576–580,
          oct 1969. doi:10.1145/363235.363259.
[KC96]    Bruce M. Kapron and Steven A. Cook. A new characterization of type-2 feasibility. SIAM Journal
          on Computing, 25(1):117–132, 1996. doi:10.1137/S0097539794263452.
[KC12]    Akitoshi Kawamura and Stephen Cook. Complexity theory for operators in analysis. ACM Trans.
          Comput. Theory, 4(2):5:1–5:24, May 2012. doi:10.1145/2189778.2189780.
[KMP+ 08] Lutz Kettner, Kurt Mehlhorn, Sylvain Pion, Stefan Schirra, and Chee-Keng Yap. Classroom
          examples of robustness problems in geometric computations. Computational Geometry, 40(1):61–
          78, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.comgeo.2007.06.003.
[Ko91]    Ker-I Ko. Complexity Theory of Real Functions. Progress in Theoretical Computer Science.
          Birkhäuser, Boston, 1991.
[Kon18]   Michal Konečný. Verified exact real limit computation. In Proc. 15th International Conference
          on Computability and Complexity in Analysis (CCA), pages 9–10, 2018.
[KST20]   Michal Konečný, Florian Steinberg, and Holger Thies. Computable analysis for verified exact
          real computation. In Nitin Saxena and Sunil Simon, editors, 40th IARCS Annual Conference on
Vol. 20:2                              EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                        17:49




          Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science, FSTTCS 2020, December
          14-18, 2020, BITS Pilani, K K Birla Goa Campus, Goa, India (Virtual Conference), volume
          182 of LIPIcs, pages 50:1–50:18. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.
          doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.FSTTCS.2020.50.
[KSZ16]   Akitoshi Kawamura, Florian Steinberg, and Martin Ziegler. Complexity theory of (functions on)
          compact metric spaces. In Proc. 31st Ann. Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pages
          837–846, New York, NY, United States, 2016. ACM/IEEE, Association for Computing Machinery.
          doi:10.1145/2933575.2935311.
[KTD+ 13] Michal Konečný, Walid Taha, Jan Duracz, Adam Duracz, and Aaron Ames. Enclosing the
          behavior of a hybrid system up to and beyond a zeno point. In 2013 IEEE 1st International
          Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems, Networks, and Applications (CPSNA), pages 120–125,
          2013. doi:10.1109/CPSNA.2013.6614258.
[Lam07]   Branimir Lambov. RealLib: An efficient implementation of exact real arithmetic. Mathematical
          Structures in Computer Science, 17:81–98, 2007. doi:10.1017/S0960129506005822.
[Luc77]   Horst Luckhardt. A fundamental effect in computations on real numbers. Theoretical Computer
          Science, 5(3):321–324, 1977. doi:10.1016/0304-3975(77)90048-2.
[Mar17]   David Marker. Model Theory of Fields. Lecture Notes in Logic. Cambridge University Press,
          Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2017. doi:10.1017/9781316716991.
[Mel08]   Guillaume Melquiond. Proving bounds on real-valued functions with computations. In Alessandro
          Armando, Peter Baumgartner, and Gilles Dowek, editors, Automated Reasoning, pages 2–17,
          Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-71070-7_2.
[Mit70]   Dragoslav S. Mitrinović. Analytic Inequalities, volume 165 of Die Grundlehren der mathematischen
          Wissenschaften. Springer, 1970. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-99970-3.
[MRE07] J. Raymundo Marcial-Romero and Martı́n H. Escardó. Semantics of a sequential language
          for exact real-number computation. Theoretical Computer Science, 379(1):120–141, 2007. doi:
          10.1016/j.tcs.2007.01.021.
[Mül01]  Norbert Th. Müller. The iRRAM: Exact arithmetic in C++. In Jens Blanck, Vasco Brattka, and
          Peter Hertling, editors, Computability and Complexity in Analysis, volume 2064 of Lecture Notes
          in Computer Science, pages 222–252, Berlin, 2001. Springer. 4th International Workshop, CCA
          2000, Swansea, UK, September 2000. doi:10.1007/3-540-45335-0_14.
[NMB06] Aleksandar Nanevski, Greg Morrisett, and Lars Birkedal. Polymorphism and separation in hoare
          type theory. In Proceedings of the eleventh ACM SIGPLAN international conference on Functional
          programming, pages 62–73, 2006. doi:10.1145/1160074.1159812.
[Par21]   Sewon Park. Continuous Abstract Data Types for Verified Computation. PhD thesis, KAIST,
          School of Computing, Daejeon, South Korea, 2021.
[PER89] Marian B. Pour-El and J. Ian Richards. Computability in Analysis and Physics. Perspectives in
          Mathematical Logic. Springer, Berlin, 1989. doi:10.1017/9781316717325.
[Plo76]   Gordon D. Plotkin. A powerdomain construction. SIAM Journal on Computing, 5(3):452–487,
          1976. doi:10.1137/0205035.
[Plo77]   Gordon D. Plotkin. LCF considered as a programming language. Theoretical computer science,
          5(3):223–255, 1977. doi:10.1016/0304-3975(77)90044-5.
[PS85]    Franco P. Preparata and Michael Ian Shamos. Computational Geometry. Monographs in Computer
          Science. Springer, 1985. doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-1098-6.
[PTVF07] William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and Brian P. Flannery. Numerical
          recipes: The art of scientific computing. Cambridge university press, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
          3 edition, 2007.
17:50     Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler      Vol. 20:2




[Rey02]   John C Reynolds. Separation logic: A logic for shared mutable data structures. In Proceedings
          17th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pages 55–74. IEEE, 2002. doi:
          10.1109/LICS.2002.1029817.
[Rey09]   John C Reynolds. Theories of programming languages. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
          United Kingdom, 2009. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511626364.
[Ric68]   Daniel Richardson. Some undecidable problems involving elementary functions of a real variable.
          Journal of Symbolic Logic, 33(4):514–520, 1968. doi:10.2307/2271358.
[Rob59]   Julia Robinson. The undecidability of algebraic rings and fields. Proceedings of the American
          Mathematical Society, 10:950–957, 1959. doi:10.2307/2033628.
[SAL+ 18] Joonhyung Shin, Namjo Ahn, Seungwoo Lee, Chansu Park, and Martin Ziegler. Towards ten-
          sor calculus in exact real computation. 21st Japan-Korea Joint Workshop on Algorithms and
          Computation, August 2018.
[Sch02]   Matthias Schröder. Effectivity in spaces with admissible multirepresentations. Mathematical Logic
          Quarterly, 48(S1):78–90, 2002.
[Sch04]   Matthias Schröder. Spaces allowing type-2 complexity theory revisited. Mathematical Logic
          Quarterly, 50(4,5):443–459, 2004. doi:10.1002/malq.200310111.
[Spe59]   Ernst Specker. Der Satz vom Maximum in der rekursiven Analysis. In A. Heyting, editor,
          Constructivity in mathematics, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages
          254–265, Amsterdam, 1959. North-Holland. Proc. Colloq., Amsterdam, Aug. 26–31, 1957.
[STT21]   Florian Steinberg, Laurent Thery, and Holger Thies. Computable analysis and notions of continuity
          in Coq. Logical Methods in Computer Science, Volume 17, Issue 2, May 2021. doi:10.23638/
          LMCS-17(2:16)2021.
[SZ18]    Dongseong Seon and Martin Ziegler. Computing Haar averages. In Proc. 15th International
          Conference on Computability and Complexity in Analysis (CCA), pages 43–44, 2018.
[Tur37]   Alan M. Turing. On computable numbers, with an application to the “Entscheidungsproblem”.
          Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 42(2):230–265, 1937.
[Tur48]   Alan M. Turing. Rounding off errors in matrix processes. Quarterly Journal of Mechanical and
          Applied Math, 1(1):287–308, 1948.
[TZ99]    J.V. Tucker and J.I. Zucker. Computation by ‘While’ programs on topological partial algebras.
          Theoretical Computer Science, 219:379–420, 1999. doi:10.1016/S0304-3975(98)00297-7.
[TZ04]    J.V. Tucker and J.I. Zucker. Abstract versus concrete computation on metric partial algebras.
          ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, 5(4):611–668, 2004. doi:10.1145/1024922.1024924.
[Wei00]   Klaus Weihrauch. Computable Analysis. Springer,                   Berlin,   2000. doi:10.1007/
          978-3-642-56999-9.
[Wei03]   Klaus Weihrauch. Computational complexity on computable metric spaces. Mathematical Logic
          Quarterly, 49(1):3–21, 2003. doi:10.1002/malq.200310001.
[YYD+ 10] Jihun Yu, Chee Yap, Zilin Du, Sylvain Pion, and Hervé Brönnimann. The design of Core
          2: A library for exact numeric computation in geometry and algebra. In Komei Fukuda,
          Joris van der Hoeven, Michael Joswig, and Nobuki Takayama, editors, Mathematical Soft-
          ware – ICMS 2010, pages 121–141, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
          doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15582-6_24.



          Appendix A. Proof of the Soundness of the Hoare Logic of ERC
We start the proof with the lemma:

Lemma A.1. For a well-typed command Γ ⊢ while b do S end ▷ Γ, define the sequences of
set-valued functions on JΓK:
Vol. 20:2                                             EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                             17:51




   0 (σ) :≡ {σ}
• Bb,S
   0 (σ) :≡ ∅
• Cb,S
                                                            (
   n+1       S          S                                    {δ ′ }     if l = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥,
• Bb,S (σ) :≡ δ∈B n (σ)                       l∈JbKδ
                 b,S
                                                 †            ∅         otherwise.
                                           δ ′ ∈↾†Γ ◦JSKδ
                                                                          
                                                                          {δ} if l = false,
                                                                          
                                                                          
   n+1         n (σ) ∪
                                                                                   if l = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥,
                                       S                S
• Cb,S (σ) :≡ Cb,S                            n (σ)
                                           δ∈Bb,S              l∈JbKσ    ∅
                                                                  ††
                                                                        
                                                             ′
                                                            δ ∈↾Γ ◦JSKδ
                                                                        
                                                                        {⊥}       otherwise.

Then, for all n ∈ N, it holds that W (n) (σ) = Cb,S
                                                  n (σ) ∪ {⊥ | ∃x. x ∈ B n (σ)}.
                                                                          b,S
                   n (σ) is the set of states that requires further execution after running the
     Intuitively, Bb,S
while loop on σ for n times, and Cb,Sn (σ) is the set of states that have escaped from the loop

(either because false has been evaluated or ⊥ has occurred) during running the loop for n
times.

Proof. Let us drop the subscripts b, S for the convenience in the presentation and write S
       †
for ↾‡Γ ◦ JSK.
     We first prove the following alternative characterization of the sequence of sets:
                                                               (
                                       n+1
                                                        [       B n (δ)      if ℓ = true ∧ δ ̸= ⊥,
                                   B         (σ) =
                                                      ℓ∈JbKσ
                                                                   ∅         otherwise.
                                                       δ∈Sσ


   It is trivial when n = 0. Now, suppose the equation holds for all σ and for all n up to m.
Then the following derivation shows that the characterization is valid for n = m + 1 as well.
                                              (
     m+2
                        [              [       {δ}          if ℓ = true ∧ δ ̸= ⊥,
 B          (σ) =
                    γ∈B m+1 (σ) ℓ∈JbKγ
                                                ∅           otherwise.
                                 δ∈Sγ
                                                                                              (
                                                     [                                 [       {δ}    if ℓ = true ∧ δ ̸= ⊥,
               =
                                
                                                                                     ℓ∈JbKγ
                                                                                               ∅      otherwise.
                                 m ′
                      S          B (δ )               if ℓ′ = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥,       δ∈Sγ
                    γ∈ ℓ′ ∈JbKσ
                        δ ′ ∈Sσ ∅                      otherwise.
                                
                                
                                                           (
                                                             {δ}         if ℓ = true ∧ δ ̸= ⊥,
                               S                                                                    if ℓ′ = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥,
                                                    S
                                   γ∈B m (δ ′ )       ℓ∈JbKγ
                      [
               =                                       δ∈Sγ        ∅      otherwise.
                    ℓ′ ∈JbKσ 
                               
                             ∅                                                                      otherwise.
                     δ ′ ∈Sσ
                        (
                      [  B m+1 (δ ′ )                 if ℓ′ = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥,
               =
                    ℓ′ ∈JbKσ
                               ∅                      otherwise.
                     δ ′ ∈Sσ
17:52      Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler   Vol. 20:2




        We now show the following characterization:
                                                  
                                                    n         if ℓ = true ∧ δ ̸= ⊥,
                                                  C (δ)
                                                  
                                                  
                                              [
                               n+1
                           C         (σ) =         {σ}        if ℓ = false,
                                                  
                                             ℓ∈JbKσ 
                                                    {⊥}
                                              δ∈Sσ            otherwise.

It is easy to show that the equation holds for n = 0. Now, assume the equation holds for all
n up to m. Then,

                                                      
                                                      {δ}
                                                      
                                                            if ℓ′ = false,
                                     [        [
C m+2 (σ) = C m+1 (σ) ∪                               ∅   if ℓ′ = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥,
                               δ∈B m+1 (σ) ℓ′ ∈JbKδ
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     {⊥} otherwise.
                                             δ ′ ∈Sδ
              = C m+1 (σ)∪
                                                                       
                                                                       {δ}
                                                                       
                                                                              if ℓ′ = false,
                                       [                         [
                                                                        ∅ if ℓ′ = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥,
                                                              ℓ′ ∈JbKδ 
                                                                      
                         B m (γ)                        ̸ ⊥, δ′ ∈Sδ {⊥} otherwise.
                                         if ℓ = true ∧ γ =
                                                                      
                 S
               δ∈ ℓ∈JbKσ
                   γ∈Sσ ∅                otherwise.
                         
                         

              = C m+1 (σ) ∪
                                          
                                                      ′
                                           {δ} if ℓ = false
                       
                                          
                                           
                       
                       
                                                 if ℓ′ = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥, if ℓ = true ∧ γ ̸= ⊥,
                        S        S
                  [  δ∈B m (γ) ℓ∈JbKδ ∅
                       
                                   δ ′ ∈Sδ 
                                           
                                          {⊥} otherwise.
                ℓ∈JbKσ 
                       
                       
                 γ∈Sσ ∅                                                   otherwise.
                       
                       
                       
                       C m (γ)∪                                             if ℓ = true ∧ γ ̸= ⊥,
                                           
                                                        ′
                                            {δ} if ℓ = false
                       
                                           
                       
                                           
                       
                                                   if ℓ′ = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥,
                          S       S
                  [  δ∈B m (γ) ℓ∈JbKδ ∅
                       
              =                         ′
                                      δ ∈Sδ 
                                            
                                            
                       
                ℓ∈JbKσ 
                                            {⊥} otherwise.
                 γ∈Sσ 
                       
                       
                       
                       {σ}                                                  if ℓ = false,
                       
                       
                        {⊥}                                                  otherwise.
                       
                       
                       C m+1 (γ) if ℓ = true ∧ γ ̸= ⊥,
                       
                  [ 
              =         {σ}       if ℓ = false,
                       
                ℓ∈JbKσ 
                       
                 γ∈Sσ   {⊥}       otherwise.

     Using the suggested characterization, we prove W (n) (σ) = Cb,S
                                                                 n (σ) ∪ {⊥ | ∃x. x ∈
 n (σ)} for all n ∈ N. When n = 0, both are {⊥}. Suppose the equation holds for n = m.
Bb,S
Vol. 20:2                                   EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                17:53




Then,
                                    
                                      (n)
                                    W (δ)       if ℓ = true ∧ δ ̸= ⊥,
                                    
                                    
                                [
                (n+1)
            W           (σ) =         {σ}       if ℓ = false,
                                    
                             ℓ∈JbKσ 
                                    
                              δ∈Sσ    {⊥}       otherwise.
                                    
                                    C m (δ) if ℓ = true ∧ δ ̸= ⊥,
                               [   
                           =          {σ}     if ℓ = false,
                                    
                             ℓ∈JbKσ 
                                    {⊥}
                              δ∈Sσ            otherwise.
                                         
                                         {⊥|∃γ. γ ∈ B m (δ)} if ℓ = true ∧ δ ̸= ⊥
                                         
                                    [ 
                                ∪         ∅                       if ℓ = false,
                                         
                                  ℓ∈JbKσ 
                                         
                                   δ∈Sσ   ∅                       otherwise.
                                                                                             
                                                              (                              
                                                                B m (δ) if ℓ = true ∧ δ ̸= ⊥, 
                                          
                                                        [                                    
                               m+1
                           =C       (σ) ∪ ⊥ ∃γ. γ ∈
                                          
                                          
                                                       ℓ∈JbKσ
                                                                ∅          otherwise.         
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                                                        δ∈Sσ
                                m+1                      m+1
                           =C         (σ) ∪ {⊥ | ∃γ. γ ∈ B       (σ)}
     We now proceed to the proof of Theorem 6.11:
Proof. We can prove the statement by checking the soundness of each rule.
(1) (Assignment):
       Consider any state σ which satisfies ∃w. LtM(w)∧∀w. LtM(w) ⇒ ψ[w/x]. Then, ⊥ ̸∈ JtK σ
    and for any w ∈ JtK σ, ψ[w/x] holds.
                                    S
       Now, see that Jx := tK σ = w∈JtKσ {σ[x 7→ w]} since ⊥ ̸∈ JtK σ and for all w ∈ JtK σ,
    σ[x 7→ w] satisfies ψ.
(2) The rule variable declarations and the rule of array assignments can be verified in very
    similar manner as above and the rules of pre/postcondition strengthening/weakening,
    skip, and sequential compositions can be verified trivially.
(3) (Conditional):
       Consider any state σ which satisfies ϕ ∧ (LbM(true) ∨ LbM(false)) ∧ ¬LbM(unknown). Then,
    JbK σ = {true, false}, {true}, or {false}. Let us check the three cases:
     (a) when JbK σ = {true, false}:
         Then, σ satisfies ϕ ∧ LbM(true) and ϕ ∧ LbM(false). Therefore, (i) ⊥ ̸∈ JS1 K σ, (ii) for
         all δ ∈ JS1 K σ it holds that δ ⊨ ψ, (iii) ⊥ ̸∈ JS2 K σ, and (iv) for all δ ∈ JS2 K σ it
         holds that δ ⊨ ψ.
         Since ⊥ ̸∈ JbK σ and unknown ̸∈ JbK σ, the denotation becomes
                                                             †            †
                          Jif b then S1 else S2 endK σ =↾‡Γ (JS1 K σ)∪ ↾‡Γ (JS2 K σ).
            Since the restriction operator does not create ⊥, the denotation does not contain
            ⊥. Also, since ψ only consists of free variables that are in Γ, each resulting state
            after the restriction still satisfies ψ.
17:54     Park, Brauße, Collins, Kim, Konečný, Lee, Müller, Neumann, Preining, and Ziegler      Vol. 20:2




        (b) when JbK σ = {true}:
            Then, σ satisfies ϕ ∧ LbM(true). Hence, (i) ⊥ ̸∈ JS1 K σ, (ii) each δ ∈ JS1 K σ satisfies
            ψ. Since JbK σ = {true}, the denotation becomes

                                                                   †
                             Jif b then S1 else S2 endK σ =↾‡Γ (JS1 K σ).

          Again, since the restriction does not create ⊥ and ⊥ ̸∈ JS1 K σ, ⊥ is not in the
          denotation. Since ψ only consists of free variables that are in Γ, each resulting state
          after the restriction still satisfies ψ
     (c) when JbK σ = {false}, it can be done very similarly to the above item.
(4) (Loop):
       Consider any state σ that satisfies I. Then, by the side-conditions, it also satisfies
    (LbM(true) ∨ LbM(false)) ∧ ¬LbM(unknown). Hence, JbK σ = {true, false}, {true}, or {false}
    for any state σ that satisfies I. Now, we fix a state σ which satisfies I hence satisfies
    the precondition.
       The core part of the proof is the statement: for any natural number n, it holds that
               n (σ), (ii) ⊥ ̸∈ C n (σ), (iii) all δ in B n (σ) or C n (σ) satisfies I, and (iv) all
    (i) ⊥ ̸∈ Bb,S                  b,S                     b,S          b,S
             n
    δ in Cb,S (σ) satisfies LbM(false).
       At the moment, suppose that the above statement is true. Then, all we have to show
    is that Bb,Sm (σ) becomes empty as m ∈ N increases. Let us define ℓ := max{V (δ) |
                                                                                       n
           n
    δ ∈ Bb,S (σ)} and show that ℓn is strictly decreasing by some quantity that is bounded
    below, as n increases. See that if it holds, there will be some m that for all δ ∈ Bb,S         m (σ),
                                     m+1
    JbK δ = {false} and hence Bb,S        (σ) = ∅.
       In order to prove it, we take the two steps:
               1 (σ) ̸= ∅, then for all n ∈ N and for all δ ∈ B n (σ), it holds that L(δ) =
     (a) If Bb,S                                                         b,S
          L(σ) > 0. In this case, let us write ℓ0 = L(σ).
               m+1
     (b) If Bb,S    (σ) ̸= ∅, it holds that ℓm+1 ≤ ℓm − ℓ0 .
    Now, we prove each statement:
     (a) Bb,S1 (σ) ̸= ∅ only if true ∈ JbK σ and there is some non-bottom δ ∈ S. Therefore, by

          the side-condition, L(σ) > 0.
                                  m+1
          Suppose any δ ∈ Bb,S         (σ) for any m ∈ N. See that it happens only if there is
          δ ∈ Bb,S (σ) such that true ∈ JbK δ ′ and δ ∈ Sδ ′ . Together with Item (iii), δ ′
           ′       m

          satisfies I and LbM(true). Let us define δ̂ ′ := δ ′ ∪ (ξ 7→ V (δ ′ ) ∪ ξ ′ 7→ L(δ ′ ). Since δ̂ ′
          satisfies the precondition in the premise, we have that for any δ̂ ∈ Sδ̂ ′ , δ̂ satisfies
          I and V ≤ ξ − ξ ′ and L = ξ ′ . Hence, L(δ̂) = L(δ ′ ). Since ξ ′ , ξ are ghost variables,
                                                                      m+1
          L(δ̂) = L(δ) = L(δ ′ ). In conclusion, for any δ ∈ Bb,S            (σ), the quantity L(δ) is
                                             ′             ′     m
          identical to the quantity L(δ ) for some δ ∈ Bb,S (σ). Since, Bb,S           0 (σ) = {σ}, we

          conclude that they are all identical to L(σ).
                                  m+1
     (b) Suppose any δ ∈ Bb,S          (σ) for any m ∈ N. See that it happens only if there is
          δ ∈ Bb,S (σ) such that true ∈ JbK δ ′ and δ ∈ Sδ ′ . Together with Item (iii), δ ′
           ′       m

          satisfies I and LbM(true). Consider δ̂ ′ := δ ′ ∪ (ξ 7→ V (δ ′ ) ∪ ξ ′ 7→ L(δ ′ ) which satisfies
Vol. 20:2                              EXACT REAL COMPUTATION                                                                   17:55




          the precondition of the premise. Hence, δ ∪ (ξ 7→ V (δ ′ ) ∪ ξ ′ 7→ L(δ ′ ) satisfies the
          postcondition. Hence, V (δ) ≤ V (δ ′ ) − L(δ) = V (δ ′ ) − ℓ0 . Hence, ℓm+1 ≤ ℓm − ℓ0 .
        Now, we need to prove the aforementioned statement on Bb,S          m and C m :
                                                                                       b,S
      (a) (Base case): Recall that Bb,S  0 (σ) = {σ} ̸= {⊥} and C 0 (σ) = {}. Hence, the four
                                                                       b,S
          conditions are all satisfied.                                 (
                                        n+1         S         S            {δ ′ } if l = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥
      (b) (Induction step): Recall Bb,S (σ) :≡ δ∈B n (σ) l∈JbKδ                                          .
                                                                δ ′ ∈Sδ ∅
                                                        b,S
                                                                                  otherwise.
                          n (σ) satisfies I, JbK δ = {true}, {false}, or {true, false}. In the case
          Since all δ ∈ Bb,S
          of true ∈ JbK δ, δ satisfies the precondition of the premise. Hence, for all δ ′ ∈ Sδ, δ ′
          is not ⊥ and also satisfies I. The case of JbK δ =  {false} is not of interest.
                                                              {δ} if l = false
                                                              
                                                              
                    n+1          n
                                                                         if l = true ∧ δ ′ ̸= ⊥ .
                                           S          S
          Recall Cb,S (σ) :≡ Cb,S (σ) ∪ δ∈B n (σ) l∈JbKσ ∅
                                                b,S      ′
                                                        δ ∈Sδ 
                                                              
                                                              {⊥} otherwise.
                           n (σ) satisfies I and LbM(false), we only need to care the rightmost
          Since all γ ∈ Cb,S
          part of the construction. Since all δ ∈ Bb,S   n (σ) satisfies I, by the side-condition,

          unknown and ⊥ are not in JbK δ. The δ is added to C n+1 (σ) only if false ∈ JbK δ.
          Therefore, δ satisfies both I and LbM(false).
          Also, in the case of true ∈ JbK δ, since δ satisfies the precondition in the premise,
                                        n+1
          ⊥ ̸∈ Sδ. Therefore, ⊥ ̸∈ Cb,S     .




                                            This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution License. To view a copy of this
                                            license, visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ or send a letter to Creative
                                            Commons, 171 Second St, Suite 300, San Francisco, CA 94105, USA, or Eisenacher Strasse 2,
                                            10777 Berlin, Germany
