      Grassmannian as Continuous Abstract Data
          Type with Computable Semantics?

          Seokbin Lee?? , Donghyun Lim, Sewon Park, and Martin Ziegler
                                   KAIST, School of Computing



       Abstract. The Grassmannian (over d-dimensional Euclidean space) is the collection of
       all homogeneous subspaces of Rd , equipped with the operations Minkowski sum (aka
       join), intersection (aka meet), orthogonal complement, and projection. From dimension
       d = 2 on, these operations are discontinuous and therefore uncomputable. We show
       that, when the integral dimension of the join/meet is given as promise, they do become
       computable: by devising devise algorithms in the Exact Real Computation paradigm.



1     Introduction
1.1    Computable Analysis
In classical theory of algorithms and computation, the choice of computation
model is not crucial since it does not affect computability and little affects com-
putational complexity. However, this model-agnosticism does not hold if the prob-
lems of interest are of continuous nature, as opposed to discrete.
    There are two major models of computation that deals with continuous data.
One is the BSS machine, an algebraic model where basic arithmetic operations
over real numbers are taken to be primitive, being computable in a single time
step [BSS89]. BSS machine model has one significant limitation: it is not imple-
mentable. No Turing machine can simulate a BSS machine. Another weakness is
that the exponential map is not computable by any BSS machine [Bra03].
    The other model, which we assume as the model, is computable analysis. It is
an analytic model, where computation over real numbers are defined as arbitrary
approximation [Wei00]. Unlike BSS machine model, it has the virtue of being
implementable.
    Computable analysis defines that a function f : Rm → Rn is computable
if there exists a Turing machine that, for every x ∈ Rm , given any sequence
(an ) ⊆ Q satisfying d(x, an ) ≤ 2−n , produces a sequence (bn ) ⊆ Q such that
d(f (x), bn ) ≤ 2−n .
    According to this definition, however, the inequality test 6=: R2 → {0, 1} is not
decidable but only semideciable [Wei00]. In other words, when testing equality of
two real numbers x and y:
?
   Supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (grant NRF-2017R1E1A1A03071032) and
   by the International Research & Development Program of the Korean Ministry of Science and ICT
   (grant NRF-2016K1A3A7A03950702).
??
   Corresponding author
– if actually x = y, then the test will get stuck;
– if actually x 6= y, then the test will return 0.
Similarly, when testing x < y,
 – if actually x < y, then the test will return 1;
 – if actually x > y, then the test will return 0;
 – if actually x = y, then the test will get stuck.
    These are theoretical limitations in the same sense that undecidability of halt-
ing problem is a theoretical limitation. There is no way to avoid this phenomenon
by adding more layers to abstractions. A programmer should be well aware of this
issue when writing a program that deals with real numbers. It is the programmer’s
responsibility to accept this limitation and still somehow write a program.

1.2     Exact Real Computation
Exact Real Computation (ERC) is an imperative language based on the philoso-
phy of computable analysis. The language provides the set of real numbers as its
primitive datatype R. The datatype is equipped with the operators (+, −, ×, /)
which represent the field operators of reals. We say that the datatype R represents
the exact real numbers in the sense that the operators come with no rounding
errors in their evaluations.
    ERC provides also a datatype for integers and instructions for conditional
branching and while loop. The detailed construction of the language can be found
in [BCK+ 16]. We illustrate in this section only two crucial differences to other
common languages:
 – All operations are exact and devoid of rounding errors.
 – Comparisons “x>0” of real numbers are partial, in that they return true in
    the case x > 0, false in the case x < 0, but do not return (‘freeze’, get
    ‘stuck’) in the case x = 0, since this is undecidable as mentioned above.
 – To write total programs, the multivalued/non-extensional lazy choose op-
    eration is essential: select(x0 > y0 , . . . , xd > yd ) will return any integer
    j ∈ {0, . . . , d} satisfying xj > yj , provided such exists — not necessarily
    reproducibly.
      By combining both, we can express various multivalued operators:
Example 1 (Soft Sign). Given a real number x and a positive integer k, select(x <
2−k , x > −2−k ) returns 0 when x ≤ −2−k , 1 when x ≥ 2−k , and 0 or 1 arbitrar-
ily when −2−k < x < 2−k . We may interpret k as a tolerance factor that when
|x| ≥ 2−k , the semantic is exactly the sign of x; but, when |x| is small relative to
2−k , the semantic contain both 0 and 1. See also [YSS13].
   Another example, consider a given finite list of real numbers x1 , · · · , xd with
a promise that at least one of them is not zero. Then we can find some j such
that xj 6= 0. This provides a computable relaxation of classical but uncomputable
pivot search to be used in Section 2.3.
1.3   Grassmannian
The Grassmannian Gkd is the collection of all k-dimensional homogeneous sub-
spaces of Rd . G d is the collection of all homogeneous subspaces, equipped with
operations Minkowski sum, intersection, orthogonal complement, and projection.
We consider each subspace of Rd represented by some basis. Computation of op-
erations on the Grassmannian is defined with respect to such a basis representa-
tion. For example, an algorithm computing the Minkowski sum has the following
specification:
INPUT 1 m linearly independent vectors u1 , · · · , um ∈ Rd
INPUT 2 n linearly independent vectors v 1 , · · · , v n ∈ Rd
OUTPUT ` linearly independent vectors w1 , · · · , w` ∈ Rd satisfying

                lspan{w1 , · · · , w` } = lspan{u1 , · · · , um , v 1 , · · · , v n }

Other operations on the Grassmannian have similar specifications.
    These operations, however, as naively specified above, are not computable.
We can reduce equality testing, which is undecidable, to those operations. For
a, b ∈ R, we have a = b if and only if the Minkowski sum of {(1, a, 0, 0, · · · , 0)}
and {(1, b, 0, 0, · · · , 0)} is of dimension 1.
    One way to make those operations computable is by changing the specification
so that algorithms be given the dimension of output space as part of input.
INPUT 1 m linearly independent vectors u1 , · · · , um ∈ Rd
INPUT 2 n linearly independent vectors v 1 , · · · , v n ∈ Rd
INPUT 3 a number l = dim(lspan{u1 , · · · , um , v 1 , · · · , v n })
OUTPUT ` linearly independent vectors w1 , · · · , w` ∈ Rd satisfying

                  lspan{w1 · · · w` } = span{u1 , · · · , um , v 1 , · · · , v n }

  This paper presents algorithms in ERC that compute operations on the Grass-
mannian with respect to the latter specification.


2     Algorithms in ERC
Class GRASSMANN consists of the following variables:
– integer d for ambient dimension
– integer m for subspace dimension
– d × m-dimensional array of reals with basis of the subspace
    Furthermore it consists of the following methods, specified and realized by
algorithms as described in the sequel: constructor, join (Minkowski sum), meet
(intersection), orthogonal complement, and projection.
Algorithm 1 Modified Gaussian Elimination
1: procedure Gaussian(A, k)                                                   . A has dimensions m × n
2:    for i from 1 to k do                                                . k is the number of iterations
3:       j ← select(|Ai,i | > 0, . . . , |Ai,n | > 0)
4:       Swap ci and cj of A                                           . ci denotes the i-th column of A
5:       for p from i + 1 to d do
                        A
6:            cp ← cp − Ai,p
                          i,i
                              ci
      return A


    The algorithms avoid undecidability of inequality by cleverly exploiting the
information of output dimension provided as part of input. They will also heavily
utilize a modified form of columnwise Gaussian Elimination, described below.
    We remark that, by “swap c1 and cj ,” we mean that the entries in the re-
spective columns should be swapped one by one; in actual implementation this
would require an iteration of n times. For simplicity, we omitted this detail in the
pseudocode.

2.1    Constructor
The constructor receives ambient dimension d and non-zero vector u ∈ Rd , verifies
the latter to be non-zero, and returns lspan(u) ∈ G1d .

2.2    Complement
This method receives a subspace (object of class GRASSMANNIAN), computes a
basis of its orthogonal complement using a modification of Gaussian Elimination,
and returns that subspace.
   Specifically, let A ∈ Rd×m denote the given matrix whose columns form a
basis of the subspace under consideration.
                                              Classical linear algebra augments it
                                 T
                               A
to an (m + d) × d matrix             , where Id denotes the d × d identity matrix;
                                Id                 
                                                   B
transform the latter to column echelon form            : Then those columns of C
                                                   C
whose counterparts in B vanish are classically known to constitute a basis of the
kernel of A, that is, of the orthogonal complement of A’s range.

Algorithm 2 Complement Pseudocode
   procedure
            Complement(A,     m, d)
            AT
                
2:    M←                                                                . Id is the d × d identity matrix
             Id
      M ← Gaussian(M, m)
       return M [m + 1 : m + d, m + 1 : d]              . return the last d rows and d − m columns of M



   We make some remarks. We note that, since it is enough to make the first
m rows of AT in echelon form, we need only loop the column index i from 1 to
m. Also, we are guaranteed that the select method used in the pseudocode will
terminate and return correctly, because of the promise that the rows of A are
linearly independent and hence A being full rank.

2.3   Join
This method receives two subspaces (objects of class GRASSMANNIAN) and the
integer dimension ` of their Minkowski sum. It verifies the subspaces to have
same ambient dimension, then computes a basis of their Minkowski sum using a
modification of Zassenhaus’ Algorithm, and returns that subspace.
    Specifically, let A ∈ Rd×m denote the given matrix whose columns form a basis
of the first subspace under consideration; and B ∈ Rd×n  similarly
                                                                   for the second
                                                         AB
subspace. Then transform the 2d × (m + n) matrix               to column echelon
                                                       A0
        C 0 0
form              where C is of format d × ` with all columns non-zero. Then the
        ∗ D0
columns of C form a basis of the Minkowski sum as sought.


Algorithm 3 Join Pseudocode
   procedure
            Join(A,
                       B, l)
            AB
      M←
            A 0
3:    M ← Gaussian(M, m + n)
       return M [1 : d, 1 : l]



   As in Subsection 2.2, pivot search in Gaussian Elimination can be adjusted
based on the promise that C has the known number ` of columns all non-zero.

2.4   Meet
Similarly to Subsection 2.3, but now the matrix D of format d×k with all columns
non-zero constitutes a basis of the intersection of known dimension k of the two
subspaces. Note that the dimension of the Minkowski sum ` = m+n−k is known
as well.

Algorithm 4 Meet Pseudocode
   procedure
            Meet(A,
                       B, k)
            AB
      M←
            A 0
      M ← Gaussian(M, m + n)
       return M [d + 1 : 2d, m + n − k + 1 : m + n]
2.5    Projection
This method receives a subspace (object of class GRASSMANNIAN), represented
as a matrix A ∈ Rd×m and another subspace B ∈ Rd×n to be projected onto
A. It verifies that d coincides with the ambient dimension of the subspace. The
resulting dimension of the projected subspace, l, is also provided.


Algorithm 5 Projection Pseudocode
   procedure Projection(A, B, l)
                  −1
      P ← A(AT A) AT         . We are guaranteed the existence of (AT A)−1 because AT A is regular
   return Gaussian(P B, l)[1 : d, 1 : l]



     To elaborate, we know that A has full column rank, therefore so does the
matrix AT A, which implies that it is invertible and therefore an inverse can be
computed via Gaussian Elimination. Once again, we omit the details for simplic-
ity.

2.6    Implementation in iRRAM
The source code is available at
https://github.com/realcomputation/irramplus/tree/master/GRASSMANN

References
[BCK+ 16] Franz Brauße, Pieter Collins, Johannes Kanig, SunYoung Kim, Michal Konecny, Gyesik
          Lee, Norbert Müller, Eike Neumann, Sewon Park, Norbert Preining, and Martin Ziegler.
          Semantics, logic, and verification of ”exact real computation”, 2016.
[Bra03]   Vasco Brattka. The emperor’s new recursiveness: The epigraph of the exponential function
          in two models of computability. In Masami Ito and Teruo Imaoka, editors, Words, Languages
          & Combinatorics III, pages 63–72, Singapore, 2003. World Scientific Publishing. ICWLC
          2000, Kyoto, Japan, March 14–18, 2000.
[BSS89] Lenore Blum, Mike Shub, and Steve Smale. On a theory of computation and complexity
          over the real numbers: np- completeness, recursive functions and universal machines. Bull.
          Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.), 21(1):1–46, 07 1989.
[Wei00]   Klaus Weihrauch. Computable Analysis. Springer, Berlin, 2000.
[YSS13] Chee Yap, Michael Sagraloff, and Vikram Sharma. Analytic root clustering: A complete
          algorithm using soft zero tests. In Conference on Computability in Europe, pages 434–444.
          Springer, 2013.
