The iRRAM : Exact Arithmetic in C++
Norbert Th. Müller
Abteilung Informatik — Universität Trier
D-54286 Trier, Germany

Abstract. Abstract: The iRRAM is a very efﬁcient C++ package for errorfree real arithmetic based on the concept of a Real-RAM. Its capabilities range
from ordinary arithmetic over trigonometric functions to linear algebra even with
sparse matrices. We discuss the concepts and some highlights of the implementation.
Keywords: Computable Real Analysis, Random Access Machines, Limits, Interval Arithmetic, Multi-valued functions, C++

1 Introduction
In the last decade, several implementations of exact real arithmetic based on different theoretical approaches or programming languages have been discussed, see e.g.
[BoCa90] (essentially based on decimal representation), [EdPo97] (linear fractional
transformations), or [GL00] (using multiple precision arithmetic). All these approaches
lack the possibility of full imperative programming that would facilitate the implementation of the usual numerical algorithms.
In [BrHe95], Brattka and Hertling considered a different approach: a Turing machine based simulation of random access machines working with reals. The basic idea
was to iterate a ﬁnite precision approximation of the RAM, but to increase the precision
from iteration to iteration.
In [Mu97], the author presented a prototype implementation based on this simulator:
an interactive Real-RAM (iRRAM). A preliminary version had already been presented at
the Second Workshop on Computability and Complexity in Analysis, August, 24/25th
1996, Trier, Germany. Since then, the package has been constantly enhanced and improved. Its stability has been proven by computations taking several weeks of time, producing just a few numbers for a small table in [HM00]. The source of the software package can be found at http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/˜mueller/.
A program for the iRRAM is coded in ordinary C++ but may use a special class
REAL, that behaves like real numbers without any error. A quite small set of intrinsic
operations is allowed to be used directly with variables of this type: usual arithmetic
operations, tests (with a special semantic deﬁned below), output, and conversion to/from
integer or other types. The programmer may use (almost) all programming methods
from C++, like deﬁning own data types (like real matrices or complex numbers, which
are already implemented in this way) and functions (even returning real values).
The most important extension to the original simulator from [BrHe95] was the implementation of a few very powerful operators for the computation of limits of userdeﬁned sequences. The operators even allow to compute multi-valued functional limits

like the complex square root [Mu98]. With their use, e.g. the full set of trigonometric
functions from sin to acosech could be implemented easily using a simple Taylor series
approach. The powerful AGM methods [Bo87,Bt76,Sch90] have been used for special
values like  or log(2) or for very efﬁcient implementations of log(x).
This ability of computing limits seems to be a unique feature of the iRRAM. The
limited scope of algebraic or symbolic computations on real numbers is left as soon
as these operators are used. From this point on, Type 2 Theory of Effectivity (TTE)
[Ko91,We95,We97] is the best ﬁtting theoretical model. This implies e.g. that computable functions must essentially be continuous, that it is no longer possible to check
whether two real numbers are equal, etc.
A certain relaxation of the ‘law’ that computability implies continuity has been
discussed e.g. in [BrHe94,BrHe95,Br96,Br99]: Instead of computing ordinary functions
we may also compute set-valued functions F , e.g. F : R ! 2R . Computing such a
function F for an argument x means that the result of the computation of F on x must
be one of the values in the set F (x).
In the iRRAM the set-valued F appears like an ordinary (but multi-valued) function
f , where we use the notation f : R R to express the multi-valuedness. Here the value
f (x) must be one of the elements of F (x). The actual choice of the value is hidden from
the user and appears to be nondeterministic: The same x may lead to different results
f (x) at different points of a computation.
The source code for the iRRAM is ordinary C++, as already said. However, some restrictions are necessary: The user should not use the normal IO operations, as this could
lead to surprising and annoying results. Dynamic allocation of memory with malloc
should be used as rarely as possible, while the use of alloca should be possible without problems. The use of external libraries has to be handled with care, as they will
normally not be suited for the special semantics of the iRRAM.
With these restrictions, C++ looses a lot of its universal character, but more than
enough is left to do numerical work. The following simple example contains some of
the most important features of the implementation and should give a rough impression
of the implementation:

;

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

#include "REALLIB.h"
REAL maxapprox (long k, const REAL& x, const REAL& y){
if ( positive(x-y,k) ) return x;
else return y;
};
REAL max (const REAL& x, const REAL& y){
return limit(maxapprox,x,y);
};
void compute() {
REAL x1 = 3.14159;
REAL x2 = "3.14159";
REAL x3 = pi();

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

rwrite(x1,-200,65);
rwrite(x2,-200,65);
rwrite(max(x3,x2),-200,65);
}

rprintf("\n");
rprintf("\n");
rprintf("\n");

int main (int argc,char **argv) {
iRRAM_initialize(argc,argv);
iRRAM_exec(compute);
}

We will brieﬂy explain this program in the following:
– Line 1 is the import of the necessary deﬁnitions.
– Lines 3-6 show an example of a simple self-deﬁned real-valued function.
– Line 4 shows applications of the usual control structures in C++ and of the overloading of operators that allow to build arithmetic expressions, here simply x-y.
The function positive(x-y,k) is an ‘intrinsic’ (see below) multi-valued test
whether x-y is positive. In the interval x y 2 ( 2k ; 2k ), the result may be wrong,
i.e it may be true as well as false. In consequence, maxapprox returns a value
that differs from the maximum of x and y by at most 2k .
– Lines 8-10 are an example for the limit computing capabilities of the iRRAM: The
maximum of x and y is the limit of maxapprox(k,x,y) for k ! 1.
– Lines 12-21 deﬁne the core procedure compute() of this iRRAM example.
– Lines 14-16 show three of the possible initializations of REAL variables: from a
double, from a string, or from a function (returning  ).
– Lines 18-20 show I/O that has to be done through special functions. In this example
values are printed with an error of at most 2 200  10 61 and with a width of
exactly 65 characters (including the exponent), so each shown decimal has to be
correct and the resulting output is as expected:
+.314158999999999988261834005243144929409027099609375000000E+0001
+.314159000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000E+0001
+.314159265358979323846264338327950288419716939937510582097E+0001

The ﬁrst line of the output shows the result of the initialization from a C++ double
with a mantissa of 53 bits leading to about 15 correct decimals. However, the full
conversion to a decimal form gives one nonzero decimal for each of the 53 bits.
The second line comes from the (much slower) initialization from a string, where
we get the precise intended value of the string constant. The third line shows the
value of  (which is computed using an AGM iteration, see e.g. [Ba88,Bo87]).
– Lines 23-26 deﬁne main, which is optional. If main is missing, exactly this four
line deﬁnition of main is used as default. This allows to use the iRRAM in two
ways: (i) As a package for exact arithmetic with a special semantics explained in
the next section, and (ii) as a tool for approximate arithmetic with ‘usual’ semantics
explained in section 14.
The paper is structured as follows: In the following two sections we give a sketch of
the semantics and of the corresponding simulation. In section 4 to 9 we will explain this
simulation in more detail and with emphasis on those implementational details that have
great inﬂuence the efﬁciency. Section 10 is devoted to the limit computing capabilities
of the iRRAM. The rest of the paper aims at applications and gives an overview of
additional features of the implementation.

2 Semantics of the iRRAM
The iRRAM implements an imperative programming language for real numbers, as
said in the previous section. We will give a rough idea of the theoretical background
by sketching a corresponding operational semantics (without going into all the details).
This greatly simpliﬁes the explanation of the concepts of the iRRAM. The later sections
will show how the semantics is realized by the implementation.
In the following, let P be a program for the iRRAM, or more precisely: a program
P that is called via iRRAM_exec(P ).
– We assume that input and output of P may each consist of two vectors of natural
and real numbers, i.e. we have an input and output space M = N  R . Here the
natural numbers might represent encoded values of other sets as long as these are
denumerable.
– For simplicity, we assume that S := N  R  M is the set of possible conﬁgurations during the computation of P . We further assume that appropriate encodings
are used to represent the state of the program execution as well as the values of all
discrete valued variables (including integers, ﬂoating point numbers, strings, pointers etc.) of P as natural numbers, which are given as the ﬁrst component md of
a conﬁguration s = (md ; mr ; (od ; or )). The second component mr represents the
real-valued variables within the program, and the third component consists of the
discrete output od and the real output or produced during the computation. The
input to P is not included in these conﬁgurations.
– On the conﬁgurations, the progress of the computation can be expressed via a transition relation =
I ;)
P  SS that depends on the program P and a given input vector
I 2 M, or equivalentlynas a (multi-valued!) transition function
TI ;P : S S.

The ﬁnite iteration =
)
=) of =) are deﬁned as
and
the
transitive
closure
I ;P
I ;P
I ;P

;

n s0 iff s = s =) s =) : : : =) s = s0 for some states s .
usual, e.g. s =
1 I ;P
0 I ;P
i
I ;P n
I ;)
P
We assume that the output is append-only, i.e. it can neither be read or rewritten.
Using =
I ;)
P , this property can be expressed via:

 (m0 ; m0 ; (o0 ; o0 ))
md ; mr ; (od ; or )) =
I ;)
P d r d r
0
00
0
implies od = od Æ od ; or = or Æ o00r for some o00d ; o00r
(

and

 (m0 ; m0 ; (od Æ o00 ; or Æ o00 ))
md ; mr ; (od ; or )) =
d
r
I ;)
P d r

0
0
00
00
iff (md ; mr ; ("; ")) =
I ;)
P (md ; mr ; (od ; or ))
(

Here " denotes the empty string and Æ denotes the concatenation of strings.
Because of the enormous complexity of C++ and the encodings necessary to achieve
the simple conﬁguration set S, we will not explicitly deﬁne =
I ;)
P here, but it should
correspond to ‘elementary’ operations within the program, like entering or leaving
loops, evaluation of (sub-)expressions, assignments, etc.

Basic operations of the iRRAM on the data type REAL like elementary arithmetic
are also assumed to be executed within one single transition! These operations will
be called intrinsic in the following. It is the appropriate choice of these intrinsics
that determines the computational power and as well as the implementability of the
iRRAM. We will only use intrinsics that are computable multi-valued function in
the sense of TTE, which implies certain restrictions: For example, there is no test
for equality of real numbers.
– We assume there is a distinct initial conﬁguration s0 = ("; "; ("; ")). Furthermore
there are a set S+ of conﬁgurations, where the program terminates successfully,
and a set S , where the program fails with an error, for example due to division of
0
a real by zero. So for s 2 S+ [ S , there is no s0 with s =
I ;)
P s.
A computation is either a ﬁnite sequence s0 =
I ;)
P : : : sn such that
I ;)
P s2 =
I ;)
P s1 =

sn 2 S+ [ S (called terminating or failing computations) or an inﬁnite sequence
+
of states s0 =
I ;)
P : : : with si 62 S [ S for all i.
I ;)
P s2 =
I ;)
P s1 =

Please note that due to the multi-valued nature of I=;)
P (and similar to nondeterministic machines), there may be many distinct computations and there may even
exist computations of different types for the same input I !
– Finally, the computed multi-valued function SP : M M is deﬁned by

SP I
(

;

) =

fO j s I ;)
P md ; mr ; O 2 S g
0 =

(

)

+

for any admissible I . Here an input I 2 M is called admissible, iff =
I ;)
P has neither
failing nor inﬁnite computations.
So SP (I ) is only deﬁned if all possible computations are terminating, and then the
value SP (I ) consists of all possible results from these computations.

3 Simulative concept of the iRRAM
In order to realize this semantics, the implementation of the iRRAM essentially simulates the real valued parts of P while preserving (almost) any computation on the
discrete parts. Internally, the simulation is done within the access method to the real
numbers. In consequence, there is no overhead to the discrete parts of the computations; a purely discrete program within the iRRAM would be as fast as outside of the
iRRAM.
– The iRRAM uses a representation of real numbers that is based on a subset of the
intervals with rational endpoints. So let J = f(l; r) j l < r; l; r 2 Qg.
A real number x is uniquely determined by an inﬁnite sequence

J

l ; r0 ); (l1 ; r1 ); (l2 ; r2 ); : : :) 2 J1

= (( 0

iff lim li = sup li = inf ri = lim ri (= x). In this case we write %(J ) = x, so
% is a (partial) surjection from J1 onto R. Here we only use that all the single
intervals contain x and ﬁnally become arbitrarily small; nested intervals or a given

convergence speed are not necessary. This representation % of the real numbers can
be extended in an obvious way to a surjection % from (J1 ) onto R .
Instead of the input space M = N  R , we use M = N  (J1 ) , i.e. each real

number x is replaced by an (arbitrary) J 2 % 1 (x). We will use I  I to denote
that I = (id ; ir ), I = (id ; ir ), and %(ir ) = ir .
The simulation will obviously not be able to write a real number or an inﬁnite
sequence of intervals within ﬁnite time, so as an (intermediate) representation of the
f
f
O
output we use M = N (J ) . The relation  between M and M that corresponds
I
to the simulation of output is more complex than  : For O = (od ; x1 Æ : : :Æ xn ) 2 M
f
O
and O = (od ; (J1;1 Æ : : : Æ J1;j1 ) Æ : : : Æ (Jn;1 Æ : : : Æ Jn;jn )) 2 M we write O  O
iff od 2 N is a preﬁx of od 2 N , n  n, and xk 2 j jk Jk;j for any k  n.
So all components from O must be present in O, either in an identical form for the
discrete parts, or at least in a ‘consistent’ way for the real parts. It is important to
notice that O may have more components than O.
f
– The conﬁguration set of the simulation will be S := N  J  M  Z  N .
Please note that S is denumerable, in contrast to S. So we are able to represent
these conﬁgurations using ordinary data structures from C++.
S
The two conﬁguration sets are connected via a simulating relation  with
I

T

S
s = (md ; x1 Æ : : : Æ xn ; O) 
s = (md; J1 Æ : : : Æ Jn ; O; p; q)

iff md = md , n = n, xi 2 Ji for all in, and if O  O. So the simulating
conﬁguration s covers the same information m on the discrete part of the simulated
conﬁguration s (i.e. ordinary data structures and process state), but represents each
internal real by just one interval. The meaning of the precision bound p and the
multi-value cache q will be explained later on.
The initial state of the simulation will be s0 = ("; "; ("; "); p0 ; ") (again, p0 will be
explained later).
– On these simulating conﬁgurations, the progress of the computation is given by a
n and closure ! ).
transition relation I ;!
P  S  S (with iterates I;!
P
I ;P
)
!
In contrast to the multi-valuedness of =
,
this
transition
I ;P
I ;P will be singleO

valued, i.e. for any given conﬁguration s, there is at most one conﬁguration s0 with
0
s I;!
P s.

Again, the output O = (od ; (J1;1 Æ : : : Æ J1;j1 ) Æ : : : Æ (Jn;1 Æ : : : Æ Jn;jn )) is appendonly, i.e. a written natural number will be appended to od , a written interval will
either appended to one of the sequences (Jk;1 Æ : : : Æ Jbek;jk ) or will start a new
sequence. This is necessary to ensure that the output produced at any point during
the simulation will remain valid forever.
In consequence the simulator as implemented in C++ does not need to store any
produced output. Although the conﬁgurations contain the output (to simplify the
description), it will not lead to any noticeable overhead in the execution of the
simulation.
I
– For inputs I 2 M and I 2 M with I  I , the transition relations have the following
two central properties:

correctness:
S
For any s 2 S with s0 I ;!
P s there is (at least one) s 2 S with s  s and

 s
s0 =
I ;)
P

restricted completeness:
S
S 00
 s =) s0 and s0 ! s there are s00 
For any s  s and s0 with s0 =
s
I ;)
P I ;P
I ;P

 s00 .
00
such that s =
I ;)
P s and s I ;!
P
It is important to note that we have a one step transition from s to s00 , but it may
take more time to reach s00 from s.
Æ
– Instead of the successful conﬁgurations S+ , there is a set S of reiteration conﬁguÆ
rations such that s  s and s 2 S+ implies s 2 S .
For such a reiteration conﬁguration, the transition relation I ;!
P is deﬁned as
0
md; mr ; O; p; q) I;!
P ("; "; O; p ; q)

(

with p0 << p, i.e. the simulation is essentially restarted with an improved precision
bound p0 . Only the multi-value cache q is saved during this transition. Of course, the
yet produced output can not be deleted, bud it has no inﬂuence on the continuation
of the simulation.
The multi-value cache q guarantees that a restarted simulation will take the same
computational path again: If we have

s0 = ("; "; ("; "); p0 ; ") I;!
P (md ; mr ; (od ; or ); p; q) = s
for a reiteration conﬁguration s, then we will get
 (md ; mr 0 ; (od ; or 0 ); p00 ; q) = s0
0
s I;!
P ("; "; (od ; or ); p ; q) I ;!
P

where p00 << p0 . Furthermore, although md and mr are deleted in the ﬁrst transition after s, md will be reconstructed afterwards, and mr 0 will have the same
length as mr but will be contain new, usually smaller, but consistent intervals. The
discrete output od will remain totally unchanged, and the real output or 0 will have
the same number of interval sequences, but each of these will usually be extended
in a consistent way.
In fact, there are many more reiteration conﬁgurations than just those simulating
S+ : As soon as the intervals in mr are too big to allow a correct continuation of the
simulation, a reiteration is done. This will be the case e.g. if we have compare two
real variables xi and xj , but the simulating intervals Ji and Jj have a nonempty
intersection. In these cases, the corresponding s will be a reiteration conﬁguration,
but the later s0 (with smaller intervals) may allow for a normal continuation of the
simulation.
The same may hold for failing conﬁgurations s 2 S . If the failure is due to an
error in the discrete part (like a division of a double by zero), a similar error will
appear in the simulation, so a failure in the simulated computation may lead to a
failure in the simulation. But if the failure comes from the real part, a reiteration
may be executed. For example, a simulated division of a real by zero will always be
a reiteration conﬁguration, so it leads to an inﬁnite sequence of reiterations, where
none of them will be able get to get past this division operation.

– The reiterations lead to the following third central property of the simulation:
convergence:

If I is admissible and I  I , then there will be one terminating computation
I

+
so =
I ;)
P sn = (md ; mr ; (od ; or ) 2 S
I ;)
P ::: =
I ;)
P s1 =

such that there is a (generally inﬁnite) simulating computation
(1) 
(2)
s0 I;!
P sn I;!
P sn : : :

with sn  sn (k) for any k , where the output components od (k) of sn (k) are
identical to od , and the or (k) converge to or .
So the output from the simulation will converge to one of the possible results from
SP (I ) by following exactly one terminating computation inﬁnitely often. So our
simulator shows that SP is a computable multi-valued function in the sense of
[BrHe94].
S

Please note that in many applications of the iRRAM, we will only have discrete
(i.e. non-real) output od and the real output or remains empty. Usually, od will consist
of approximations to real numbers with some ﬁnite precision. Here the simulation may
stop as soon as a conﬁguration from S+ is reached, as this discrete output will not be
changed again. In this case, we get ﬁnite simulations and we also may use the iRRAM
as a tool for ordinary approximative computations within arbitrary other programs!

4 Basic Multiple Precision Arithmetic
The backend of the iRRAM consists of an implementation of the intervals that are
used to approximate the real numbers. Here multiple precision arithmetic is used, for
which many freely available packages exist. Pioneering work in this area had been done
by R.P. Brent [Bt75,Bt76,Bt78] with his MP package in FORTRAN 77. An overview,
although quite old, can be found e.g. in the ﬁle BIGNUMS.TXT [Rio94] available freely
in the internet. At the moment, one of the most elaborate packages is GMP 3.1 (Gnu
Multiple Precision, [Gr00]), using assembler routines at time critical parts.
In its ﬁrst prototype from August 1996, the iRRAM was based on a small MP package called LongReal written by the author. Meanwhile, also GMP can be used in two
different ways (see below). As the interface to the MP backend is very simple, it would
be easy to use other MP packages as well. At the time of writing, an interface deﬁnition
to MPFR [Zi00] was already started, but not fully functional.
The necessary routines for multiple precision arithmetic can essentially be divided
in two parts:
– A few low level but time critical operations that work on arbitrarily long integers (GMP:gmp_n) or on the arbitrarily long mantissa of ﬁxed point numbers
(LongReal:Dyadic_Base), essentially these are the 4 basic arithmetic operations (reduced to these sets) and a shifting operator.

– A higher level of about 20 routines for arbitrary MP numbers (gmp_f and Dyadic),
essentially these are arithmetic operations, comparison, type conversions, etc. Internally, the low level routines are applied whenever possible.
Both GMP and LongReal allow access to both levels. LongReal is also able to
use the low level routines of GMP. So at compile time, the user can choose between 3
different ﬂavors of the iRRAM: GMP (using gmp_f and gmp_n), LR for the original
LongReal (using Dyadic and Dyadic_base), and LRGMP (using Dyadic and
gmp_n). This approach has the advantage that errors in the implementation can be
found much easier. In fact, with the use of LRGMP two errors in the GMP 3.0 routines
(in addition to several other internal errors) could be found.

iRRAM
REALlib

Dyadic

gmp_f

Dyadic_Base

gmp_n

LongReal

GMP

Fig. 1. The iRRAM and its backends

One quite big conceptual difference between GMP and LongReal is how the still
ﬁnite precision is handled (i.e. how rounding errors are created): In GMP, each variable
is allocated with a (changeable) amount s of memory, and after an operation = a Æ
b the variable contains the best approximation to the exact result a Æ b ﬁtting into
the allocated memory, so the single operations of GMP work with relative precision of
results and each operation introduces an error of order  2 s .
The concept of LongReal is different: After ﬁxing a desired precision p, the operation = a Æ b yields a result with j
a Æ bj  2p , so the single operations work
with an absolute precision independent from a, b, and ‘Æ’. In consequence, the user does
not need to know anything about memory allocation and can concentrate on the error
propagation.
All these three ﬂavors of the iRRAM implement a type of ﬂoating point numbers
with a variable sized mantissa and a 32 bit exponent called DYADIC. On the user level,
the differences are hidden: the concept of precision is as in LongReal. Overloading
of the arithmetic operators further simpliﬁes the usage. In the following we show a
few lines of the interface: Setting the precision and overloading the basic arithmetic
operators.

class DYADIC
{
public:
static void setprec(long p);
...
friend DYADIC operator + (const DYADIC& x, const DYADIC& y);
friend DYADIC operator - (const DYADIC& x, const DYADIC& y);
friend DYADIC operator * (const DYADIC& x, const DYADIC& y);
friend DYADIC operator / (const DYADIC& x, const DYADIC& y);
friend DYADIC operator - (const DYADIC& x);
...
};

The implementation has a restricted form of own memory management for multiple
precision variables as it manages a pool of variables that are already initialized. This
signiﬁcantly reduces the overhead for for the frequent creating of new real object, that
arises from the overloading operators in C++.

5 Simpliﬁed Interval Representation
In the previous chapter we presented a simple interface to multiple precision numbers.
A similar concept with overloaded operators is used for an interface to real numbers
that are represented by the data type REAL. As explained in section 3, we only need
to use single intervals. So internally, each variable x of type REAL is implemented
as a multiple precision number d together with information on the absolute error e 
jd xj. It has already been explained how the inﬁnite character of the reals is represented
through these intervals. Essentially, in any stage of the computation, we work with
intervals (d e; d + e) knowing that x must be included in the interval.
The error information e could be stored in many different ways and especially in
many different resolutions, and is not necessarily connected to the length of d. We
might chose f2 n jn 2 Ng as set of possible error informations, which could be called
a ‘precision of n bits’. As an other possibility, we might choose fz  2p jz 2 N; p 2 Zg,
so that we are able to describe errors very precise in the manner of a true interval
arithmetic.
Both extremes have disadvantages: With the ﬁrst approach, we would only need
one additional integer to represent e (i.e. 4 byte) but we would loose at least one bit of
information (concerning the mantissa of d) on any operation, demanding a very high
initial precision. The second approach implies storing e as an own multiple precision
number (or storing both values d e and d + e), so the storage is doubled and operations
are slower.
The iRRAM implements an intermediate solution: The error is stored as a value
from fz  2p jz 2 N; p 2 Zg, but restricted to z < 2gb and jpj < 2maxexp . The values of
gb and maxexp depend on the CPU and the MP package in use: For usual 32 bit CPUs
and LR we have gb = 30 and maxexp = 29.
So internally, each variable x of type REAL is implemented as a (simpliﬁed) interval (d  e), where d is a multiple precision number and e simply consists of two values

of type long to represent p and z . In consequence, each elementary operation on the
intervals consists of one multiple precision operation (where the complexity increases
with growing precision) and a few simple operations on integers (with ﬁxed complexity), and we have a signiﬁcant reduction in the growth of errors (compared to n-bit
precision) during single operations by only a small overhead, especially in computing
scalar products of vectors where all components are of similar error.

6 Controlling the Precision
Each single operation = a Æ b on REAL variables is transformed to the underlying
intervals: If a  (da  ea ) and b  (db  eb )), the multiple precision number d of the
result  (d  e ) is computed from da and db with an absolute precision 2p .
Here p essentially depends on the actual errors ea = za  2pa and eb = zb  2pb
of a and b: If ea and/or eb are quite large, it would be a waste of time to compute d
very precisely. On the other hand, it will not always be advantageous to choose a very
high precision, if ea and eb are very small: Already simple divisions with precise values
(like = REAL(1)=REAL(3)) would lead to unwanted and very high computational
costs. In order to avoid this, p may not be smaller a certain precision bound p (that will
change during the execution of a program and will be explained later in more detail).
(Please note that we are working with errors of size 2p and not 2 p , so p should be
larger and not smaller than p ! Usually, p and p will be negative.)
As an example, we examine the resulting error propagation for the division of reals:
Let da ; ea = za  2pa and db ; eb = zb  2pb be given. In order to exclude division
by zero, suppose jdb j > 2  eb > 0, so jdb j=2  jbj. Suppose we compute d with
jd da =db j  2p for a certain p that will be speciﬁed later.
For i = a or i = b, let si 2 Z be as small as possible with jdi j < 2si , i.e. usually
s
1
i
2
 jdi j < 2si . In case of di = 0, si will be the above minimal value 2 maxexp
due to the limitations of the implementation of the multiple precision numbers.
For a, b with jda aj  ea and jdb bj  eb we have

j ab d j

 j ab dda j p j a da  dbb  dda  db b j p
b
b
ea  jdb j eb  jda j
 jd j=  jd j j p
b
b
za pa sb zb pb sa p
za pa sb
zb pb sa sb

sb
+2

=

(

+

+

+

2

2

2



+

+2

1

Choosing p = maxfpa

pa sb +1 p + z
2
b

+

(

)

+2

+2

2

2

)

p +sa
2 b

=

2

+1

+

2

+

2

+1

p

+2

sb +1; pb +sa 2sb +1; pg we have ja=b dj  2p  (za 

2sb +1

p + 1), where the value in parentheses consists of

non-positive exponents of 2 and the integer factors za and zb .
Using appropriate right shifts of za and zb and ordinary integer arithmetic, we can
easily compute the integer value z = dza  2pa sb +1 p + zb  2pb +sa 2sb +1 p + 1e.
So we have ja=b d j  2p  z =: e .

We have z  za + zb + 1, so the value of the error mantissa might grow from
operation to operation. If z  2gb , we reduce z by computing z 0 := z =4 + 1 and
0
p0 = p + 2, so that still 2p  z  2p  z 0 , but now within the allowed range for the error
mantissa. If the resulting exponent p0 gets larger then 2maxexp , we emit an ‘overﬂow
warning’ and do a reiteration, that will be explained in detail in the next section.

7 Iterating a Computation
Essentially, all computations are done with approximations to the real numbers. Each
single operation is executed with a certain precision that is inﬂuenced by the precision
bound p.
Due to the accumulation of errors during a longer computation, it may happen that
the error of an approximation gets too big (e.g. to compare numbers). This is one of
the points where the central concept of the iRRAM (taken from [BrHe95]) is used: The
whole computation is repeated with a signiﬁcantly better (i.e. smaller) precision bound
p! So instead of a single and ﬁxed precision bound we have a sequence p0 >> p1 >>
p2 : : :, where a recomputation with pi+1 as precision bound instead of pi will usually
lead to better approximations.
The choice of these precision bounds has no inﬂuence of the correctness of the
iRRAM simulation, as long as they get arbitrarily small. On the other hand, the time
complexity may be quite different.
It is well known that the asymptotic complexity of sequences of iterated computations is of the same order as the complexity of the last iteration, if we have pi = p0 f i
for a ﬁxed (e.g. rational) f > 1 and if all used operations and functions have a well behaved (‘regular’, see e.g. [Mu93]) complexity. Applications of such regular or ‘smooth’
complexity bounds have already been studied e.g. in [Bt76,FiSt74,CoAa89]
So in theory, the choice of p0 and f is not essential. Obviously, the starting precision
as well as the increment in the iterated computations are critical points in practice. If
we start with values for p0 and f that are too large, we loose computation time because
we are too precise. On the other hand, small values lead to frequent reiterations.
i
The iRRAM uses pi = p0 + g  ff 11 , where p0 = g = 50 and f = 1:25. This
leads to the following precisions bounds for the ﬁrst iterations:

p0
p1
p0 = 50 p0 + g =

p2
100

162

p3 : : : p10 p15
p20
p25 : : :
240 : : :
1703
5502
17096
52477 : : :

p0 , q, and f are not ﬁxed at compile time, but can be changed at the start of any program to optimize its time complexity. The initial value p0 = 50 was chosen because
the IEEE double precision ﬂoating point numbers have a mantissa of slightly more than
50 bits.
An important example for reiterations is the division of reals: One of the assumptions above was jdb j > 2  eb > 0 to exclude a division by zero. If this inequality does
not hold, we may either have attempted a true division by zero or (usually) the error e2
in the approximation d2 is too large to exclude such a division. So this is a point where
a reiteration with higher initial precision should be initiated.

This also implies that a division by zero initiates an inﬁnite loop of iterations instead of an exception as in usual arithmetic. As division can not be extended to a total
continuous function, this effect is unavoidable.
The same holds with the tests on the real numbers: If we compare two numbers x
and y , and the corresponding intervals have a nonempty intersection, we reiterate the
computation in the hope that we will get smaller intervals with empty intersection. So
comparing numbers leads to an inﬁnite loop if they are identical, which is a well-known
property in TTE. On the other hand, if applied to different arguments, comparing will
eventually lead to the correct result, maybe on the cost of a high precision.
The current version of the iRRAM implements reiterations by a longjmp, i.e. an
immediate return to an outer level of control. If the iRRAM is called with
iRRAM_exec(compute) (which is the default), the jump (usually, but see the chapter on limits) leaves the procedure compute and returns to iRRAM_exec. Here the
precision is incremented as above, then compute is restarted from the beginning. Coming versions of the iRRAM might use the exception handling mechanisms of C++ instead of longjmp.

8 Input and Output
The iterative character of the computations described above poses problems for interactive usage of the iRRAM: In each iteration each input from stdin and each output to
stdout is repeated. Although this can be used to identify the iterations, any illusion
of working with entire real numbers is destroyed.
To avoid this effect, the user should use the special IO-functions rscanf for reading one input and rprintf for writing (a variable number of) outputs. These functions
are able to use the usual format speciﬁers from C++.
In addition, there is a function rwrite(x,p,w), which prints a decimal approximation to a real number with an error of at most 2p and with a width of w characters.
If the real number is smaller than 2p , the output consists simply of a single ‘0’ padded
with blanks.
Finally there is a function rshow(x,w) showing the value x in a ﬁeld of at most
max(9,w) characters. The shown result is correct, however the last decimal might differ
by 1. In addition, denormalized output in the form e.g. ".*E-0003" just indicates that
the value of x is below 10 3 . rshow does never lead to reiterations, but in case of a
denormalized output, the result might not be very helpful.
The implementation of rscanf simply uses buffered input: the input from the user
is copied to a ﬁnite buffer (currently of ﬁxed size 100000 characters). On each iteration
a pointer in the buffer is reset to the beginning of the buffer, then inputs are taken from
the buffer moving this pointer. Only when the pointer reaches the end of the buffered
input, new characters are appended to the buffer by reading from the standard input.
rprintf, rshow(x,w) and rwrite(x,p,w) simply use a counter for the
number of outputs form previous iterations to determine whether a call should actually lead to new output. This counter can be considered as a part of the multi-value
cache, as it value must survive the reiterations. Calling rwrite(x,p,w) may imply
a reiteration if the necessary error bound is not given in the actual iteration.

Input and output of reals (i.e. of inﬁnite objects, not just approximations like in
rwrite(x,p,w)) are not implemented yet. As already said at the end of section
3, this implies that our programs may stop as soon as they exit from being called via
iRRAM_exec. Output of real numbers could of course be easily implemented by opening an own output stream for each written real value. In reiterations we would simply
append a new interval to the corresponding stream. But as these streams are necessarily
of inﬁnite length, the simulation must be continued forever with improved precision
bounds after reaching terminating conﬁgurations. This could be useful on machines
with more than one processor or in computer clusters, where we might pipe the output
form one iRRAM into another one in order to achieve parallelization. Until know, it has
simply not been necessary to implement these input or output functions.

9 Multi-valued Functions
In traditional arithmetic for single or double precision numbers, there are many functions that cannot be adopted directly to the iRRAM: Essentially, the semantics of the
iRRAM must be continuous, whereas these functions are not continuous.
Sometimes, it is possible to implement similar functions by restricting the domains,
like division with the exception of zero or the tests, where identical arguments lead to
inﬁnite loops.
Another possibility has been used in [BrHe94,BrHe95,Br96,Br99]: operations with
uncertainty that usually give the correct result but also are allowed to give a ‘slightly’
wrong answer near points where the operation is not continuous in its arguments. So
instead of computing with ordinary functions we may also compute with relations
R  R2 or set-valued functions F : R ! 2R . (Both notions are equivalent, simply
use F (x) = fy j(x; y ) 2 Rg.) The underlying concept of a ‘computable relation’ had
already been brieﬂy deﬁned in [We87].
Computing such a set-valued function F for an argument x means that the result of
the computation of F on x must be one of the values in the set F (x). An alternative
approach (where a computation must compute all values of F (x)) has been intensively
discussed in [Br99]. Although that approach has advantages from the theoretical side,
any implementation would surely be quite ineffective. A comparison between the two
approaches can be found in [Mu00].
This concept has been incorporated into the iRRAM since its very ﬁrst prototype
[Mu96]: In the iRRAM, the set-valued F appears like an ordinary (but multi-valued)
R, where the value f (x) must be one of the elements of F (x). The
function f : R
actual choice of the value is hidden from the user and appears to be nondeterministic:
The same real number x may lead to different results f (x) at different points of a
computation.
In the following, we list most of the intrinsic multi-valued functions that are implemented in the iRRAM. Of course, the user can easily construct new functions of this
kind, either through the usual control structures of C++ or using a special limit operator
that will be explained in the next chapter.

;

– long size (const REAL& x);

size(x) is one of the integer values k = blog2 jxj + 1 or k = dlog2 jxje + 1. So
the value of size(x) is not exactly ﬁxed, but it is sure that jxj lies between 2k 2
and 2k . The iRRAM is allowed to return any of the possible values. In consequent

size(x)
5
4
size(x)=3
or
size(x)=2

3
2
1
0
0.5

1

2

4

8

16

32

x=3

Fig. 2. A graph of the multi-valued function size(x)

calls with the same real value x, we might even get different values for size(x).
From the view of the programmer, this is a kind of nondeterminism in the program.
On the simulating level, where x is represented as an interval (d  e), the choice
of k is deterministic: We simply compute k = dlog2 (jdj + e)e℄, which immediately
implies jxj < jdj + e  2k . If e  jdj=4, then jxj > jdj e > (jdj + e)=2 > 2k 2 ,
so we return k as the value of size(x).
If e > jdj=4, the precision of the interval is not sufﬁcient, so we invoke a reiteration.
This implies for example, that usage with argument x = 0 leads to an inﬁnite loop.
Because of the limited exponent of the MP numbers, it is sufﬁcient to use long as
result type for size.
– bool bound (const REAL& x,const long k);
bound(x,k) is a test whether jxj is smaller than 2k . The result will be correct
if jxj > 2k or jxj  2k 2 . In any other case, the result also is deﬁned, but may
be incorrect. Calling the function may imply a reiteration, but the test will ﬁnish as
soon as the error is small enough:
bound(x; k ) =

8
<
:

;

true

jxj  k
; k  jxj > k
jxj > k
2

true or false 2
false

2

2

2

2

So bound(x; k ) = true implies jxj  2k , while bound(x; k ) = false implies
jxj  2k 2 .
If it is necessary to check that a number is small enough (usually given as the error
of an approximating algorithm), bound(x,k) should be preferred to size(x)<k
as there is no singularity for x = 0.

– bool positive
(const REAL& x, const long k);
positive(x,k) tests whether x is positive. In the interval ( 2k ; 2k ), the result
may be wrong:
positive(x; k ) =

8
<
:

true

;

true or false
false

;

x > 2k
k

2

x<

x k
2

k

2

In contrast to the comparison operator ‘x < 0’, the function positive has the
advantage to be total, so it can be used even if it is unknown whether x = 0.
Calling positive(x,k) may invoke reiteration, but again the test will ﬁnish as
soon as the error is small enough.
– DYADIC approx
(const REAL& x, const long p);
approx(x,k) results in a DYADIC result d such that jx dj  2 k . Calling
the function may invoke reiteration. The function can be used to enhance the set of
DYADIC functions: If REAL f(const REAL& x) computes f : R ! R, then
for any DYADIC d, we can get a DYADIC approximation to f (d) with an error
of at most 2p simply with approx(f(d),p) (using an implicit type conversion
from d to type REAL).

x  0,
These functions can be used e.g. in the construction of loops: For any
pxpj and
the following (multi-valued!) function returns a real y such that jy
 2p using
Heron’s iteration algorithm for the square root.
REAL sqrt1(long p,REAL x) {
REAL a=1,b=x;
do {
a=(a+b)/2;
b=x/a;
} while ( !bound(a-b,prec) );
return a;
}

In our simulation of the iRRAM, we must be careful when an intrinsic multi-valued
function is called: In different iterations, we get different intervals, so that the (deterministic) computation of the function might lead to different results. For example, when
computing size(x), an early iteration might deliver dlog2 jxje + 1 as result, based on
some interval (d  e). A later iteration might get another interval (d0  e0 ) with smaller
d0 + e0 < d + e, so at the same stage of the the computation we now get blog2 jxj + 1.
Although both results are consistent with the deﬁnition of size, we might have trouble
with the synchronization of the ﬂow control in the iterations, as can easily be seen in
the following few lines of source code:
if ( size(x) <p ) {
rprintf("Input A:");
} else {
rprintf("Input B:");
}

rscanf(a);
rscanf(b);

This could lead to a totally different behavior in different iterations. The iRRAM
solves this problem using its multi-value cache: It simply recalls any known values
from the cache before computing new values (that are immediately appended to the
cached values). In consequence, any ﬂow of information from the continuous world of
reals to the discrete world stays unchanged through the reiterations. This again implies
that the ﬂow of control in a computation will be repeated in reiterations up to the point
where the previous iteration ended. As a side effect, we only need to store a sequence
of the results and a pointer to the last recalled valued, and do not need any information
on the context of the operations to reproduce their results.
The current implementation simply deﬁnes an array of 100000 longs to store the
results of size or of tests and an additional array of the same size to store the results
of approximations using approx. In consequence, these operations should be applied
as rarely as possible!
In the following chapters, we discuss environments where caching the results is not
necessary (or even causes errors). In such circumstances, the operations can be used
freely without permanently occupying memory.

10 Computation of Limits
A unique feature of the iRRAM are several operators for the computation of limits
of certain families of real numbers or real-valued functions. On one hand, this ability
implies that the iRRAM e.g. is not able to check whether two given real numbers are
equal (e.g. if one of them is such a limit). On the other hand, the limit operator is very
powerful: Almost any important object in analysis is deﬁned as some kind of a limit, e.g.
computing the square root can be done by computing the limit of the function sqrt1
from the previous chapter.
This capability of limit computing extends the computational power of the iRRAM
in a way that the scope of algebraic of symbolic computations is left, also the computational model of Blum, Shub, and Smale[BSS89] is no longer applicable. The correct
corresponding theoretical model is Type 2 Theory of Effectivity (TTE) [Ko91,We95,We97],
although this model works essentially on a Turing machine level. Example deﬁnitions
of computations on topological structures like R on an abstract level (i.e. without using representations) can be found in [TZ99] (but without multi-valued functions and
without an internal limit operator) or [Br99] (but with a slightly different approach to
multi-valued functions).
The iRRAM implements three types operators for limits:
– for families fap j p 2 Zg of functions ap : M1 M2 converging uniformly and
with known speed to a single-valued limit f with f (x) = lim ap (x).
p! 1

– for families fap j p 2 Zg of functions similar to above, but where we have additional information on the limit f (essentially f must fulﬁll a Lipschitz condition).
– for families fap j p 2 Zg of functions converging to a multi-valued limit f (x).
Here M1 and M2 are the metric spaces of real numbers, real matrices, or complex
numbers. The iRRAM is already prepared to deal with other metric spaces, although
until now it was not necessary to implement such a case.

The limit operators need fap j p 2 Zg as one of their parameters, usually as a
function a of p 2 Z and x 2 M1 . This implies that there must be a program computing
a, so the operators will only be applied to computable parameters, i.e. to families of
(multi-valued) continuous functions.
We will discuss all three types in detail but, for simplicity, only for the case M1 =
M2 = R (or C).
10.1 Simple Limits

;

For limits of the ﬁrst type we need a family fap g e.g. of functions ap : R R converging to a function f : R R in the sense that jap (x) f (x)j  2p for any x 2 dom(f )
(and any possible value of the multi-valued ap (x)). The corresponding limit operator is
REAL

limit

(REAL a(long, const REAL&),

const REAL& x);

It should be emphasized that the functions ap will usually be multi-valued, but the
limit f must be single-valued. In consequence, f must be a (maybe partial) continuous
function.
An example for ap (x) is sqrt1(p,x) already mentioned in the previous chapter;
here the limit f is the square root deﬁned on R+
0 . In the iRRAM, we may now deﬁne
the square root function by
REAL sqrt(const REAL& x) {return limit(sqrt1,x);}
This function sqrt can be used like any of the built-in elementary functions!
The idea of the implementation is quite simple: If we want to compute such a limit
limp! 1 ap (x) in an iteration, we simply compute and return ap (x) for some p, such
that p tends to 1 with improving precision bounds pi during the iterations.
Three problems must be faced: (1) in each iteration, the second argument x to
limit is only known with errors, (2) the error of the computed result ap (x) is 2p plus
the error in the computation, and (3) the ﬂow of control will be different in different
iterations!
The argument x in limit(a,x) will not be exact during any stage of the computation. So we are only able to compute the values ap (x) with an error at least corresponding to the modulus of continuity of the function ap using the given approximation
to x. In practice, the best achievable result will usually be much worse, as the computation of ap (x) need not be optimal with respect to error propagation. To solve this
problem, we try to compute ap (x) for several values p that are chosen the same way as
the precision bounds: In the i-th iteration of the iRRAM using precision bound pi , we
consider the values ap (x) for p = p0 ; p1 ; : : : ; pi . Then we take that result giving the
smallest error (as the sum of the error from the computation of ap (x) and the bound 2p
for the difference between ap (x) and the limit f (x)).
So here we face the situation that a failure of a computation due to insufﬁcient precision should not lead to a recomputation of the whole program. Instead of this, we have
local iterations of the computations, i.e. the longjmp from within the computation
of the limit must no longer lead to iRRAM_exec, but to the procedure implementing

limit. In addition, limit has a longjmp to an outer level, if ap (x) can not be computed for any of the tested values of p due to the error in x. After that outer longjmp,
the program will return to the computation of the limit with a better precision bound and
hence a (usually) better approximation for the argument x. This ensures that eventually
there will be successful tries of ap (x) even for arbitrarily small p. This again ensures
that the error of the limit will get arbitrarily small in later iterations. This behavior of the
limit operator (and of all the other intrinsic functions) is the origin for the conversion
property deﬁned in section 3.
For different iterations of the iRRAM, we now can not avoid different ﬂows of
control: We have to compute ap for several different values p depending on the precision
bounds pi . But due to the construction, the different control ﬂows are restricted to the
computation of the limit, which is continuous in its argument x. So it is sufﬁcient for the
iRRAM to stop using its multi-value cache as long as it is in the process of computing
a limit.
In consequence, the local changes of the ﬂow of control will have no inﬂuence on
the outer ﬂow of control unless there are side effects. So neither input, output nor any
other side effects (e.g. assignments to global variables) are allowed in the algorithm
computing ap (x). Unfortunately, this can not be expressed within the syntax of C++.
Computing the limit in the way described above has an important disadvantage: The
precision bounds pj were chosen sparse in order to get an optimal behavior of the time
complexity of the whole computation. But now this implies that the error of the result
f (x) might be very big compared to the error of the argument x: Sometimes it will not
be possible to compute api (x) successfully using precision bound pi , regardless of the
actual value of pi , simply because in that iteration x already has an error of this size. So
it might be that in any iteration, the best achievable result of the limit operator might be
api 1 (x) implying a very big loss of precision!
For example, numerical iterations xi+1 = (xi ), where  is implemented using
this limit operator, might only be usable for small values of i, as we will need at least
iteration pi of the iRRAM to get xi with an error of p0 .
Some heuristic improvements should be mentioned: If the limit operator is called
in the iteration with precision bound pi , the values ap (x) are computed in the modiﬁed order p = pi ; p0 ; p1 ; : : : ; pi 1 and with a precision bound that is changed to pi+1
during the computation of the limit. This change in the precision bound increases the
probability that api can be computed successfully. If this is the case and if the resulting
interval for api is not larger than 2pi 1 , then it is taken as the result of the limit in this
iteration (of course increased by 2pi ). This implies that very often it is not necessary to
test more than one value.
10.2 Lipschitz Limits
If we have more information on the limit, we can do much better than above. Very
often, we know that a (maybe lengthy) computation leads to a quite smooth result. One
example is the trigonometric function sine, where we know that j sin(x) sin(y )j 
jx yj. In this case, we know that it would be possible to approximate sin(x) by sin(d)
with an error of only e, if x is known to be in the interval (d  e). But as a longer
computation is necessary to compute sin, any ordinary interval arithmetic on (d  e)

would yield an interval (d0  e0 ) with a much larger error e0 >> e. So the central idea is
to use interval arithmetic not for sin(d  e), but for sin(d  e~) for a very small e~ yielding
an interval (d00  e00 ) and then to use (d00  (e + e00 )) as a valid interval approximation
for sin(x).
We may generalize this idea as follows: If x is known as an interval (d  e) when
computing the limit and if we know an upper bound 2` of a Lipschitz constant for the
limit f in the interval (d  e), we may simply choose p such that 2p is slightly bigger
than 2` e and compute ap (d). (A similar concept had already been introduced in [Mu88]
as ‘locally Lipschitz continuous functions’.) Then jap (d) f (x)j  jap (d) f (d)j +
jf (d) f (x)j  2p + 2`  e  21+p , i.e. ap (d) differs from the limit f (x) by at most
1+p
2
.
d can be treated as an exact real value, so we are able to compute am (d) with an
arbitrary small error. To do this, we might start a new version of the iRRAM just to
compute this value. In fact, the iRRAM simply uses local iterations for the computation
of ap (d) with precision bounds pi+1 ; pi+2 : : : until one of these iterations also gives an
error of less than 21+p .
These iterations work similar to above: The longjmp within the computation of
the ap (d) is redirected temporarily to the procedure implementing limit_lip. However, there are two big differences to the implementation of the simple limit operator:
For the simple limit we had a ﬁxed bounding precision within the different iterations,
but the index p of ap (d) was changed from iteration to iteration; the Lipschitz limit is
computed with a ﬁxed index p of ap (d), but the bounding precision changes. This also
implies that the application of the Lipschitz limit will never lead to a reiteration of the
whole computation.
Again, the local iterations do not need a multi-value cache as their result leads to
a continuous function. As the local iterations start with precision bound pi+1 and only
need to get result with error larger than 2pi , it will happen very often that already the
ﬁrst iteration is successful.
The corresponding limit operator takes the form
REAL

limit_lip

(REAL a(long, const REAL&),
long lip, const REAL& x);

where the variable lip corresponds to the logarithm ` of the Lipschitz constant 2`
from above.
This operator has two important advantages compared to the simple limit operator
introduced before: (1) The growth of the error bounds is reduced to the minimal possible
amount and in consequence (2) the computation time is also reduced very often, because
smaller error bounds usually lead to fewer iterations.
Most of the functions that are deﬁned in the iRRAM use this concept, e.g. exp,
sin and os. Here we will show how to implement the maximum function using the
Lipschitz limit operator.
To compute the maximum of two numbers using ﬂoating point arithmetic, usually
a program similar to the following is used:
REAL maximum(const REAL& x, const REAL& y)
{ if ( x > y ) return x; else return y;}

Obviously, this is not the right solution for the iRRAM, as we are not able to get
a result of the comparison if x and y are equal. So the right way is to interpret the
maximum as a limit:
REAL max_approx (long k, const REAL& x, const REAL& y)
{ if ( positive(x-y,k) ) return x; else return y; };
REAL maximum (const REAL& x, const REAL& y)
{ return limit_lip(max_approx,0,x,y); };

10.3 Multi-valued Limits
In the previous examples, the results of multi-valued functions were from discrete sets
(boolean, integer, ﬁnite strings etc.) and it was possible to compute these results in
ﬁnite time. Especially it was always possible to store the actual outcome of a multivalued function in order to reuse it in a subsequent iteration of the iRRAM. This is no
longer possible, if we are considering multi-valued functions with results e.g. from the
set of real numbers.
Of course, simple functions of this kind can be constructed using the discrete multivalued tests, e.g. modulo(x; y ) := x ky where k 2 Z with (k 1)y  x  (k + 1)y .
This function computes one of the possible values z , jz j  y 6= 0, such that x y z is an
integer. It can be used to scale the arguments of periodic trigonometric functions to get
efﬁcient implementations:
REAL modulo (const REAL& x, const REAL& y){
return x-round(x/y)*y;
};

Here round(x) is a multi-valued integer function with j x round(x) j< 1.
When applying the modulo function, the iRRAM would automatically store the result
of round, which is sufﬁcient to reconstruct the value of modulo in possible later
reiterations.
A more elaborate example concerns the square root of complex numbers: The square
root of a number z is one of the two numbers x or x, where x2 = z , which immediatley leads to multi-valuedness. If z 2 R+
0 , it is easy to choose one of the values: usually
the positive root is taken.
For arbitrary z 2 C, a continuous choice of one of the roots is not possible: Any
continuous function r : fei j0    2 g ! C on the unit circle satisfying r(z )2 = z
would lead to

r(1) = lim
r(ei ) =
!0+

!2
lim

r(ei ) = r(1)

which is a contradiction.
If we restrict ourself to z 6= 0, a multi-valued implementation of the complex square
root can be implemented using the simple multi-valued tests: If z = a + ib 6= 0, at least
one of the real numbers a and b must also be different from 0. Then one of the complex
roots can be computed using the ordinary real square root, but the computation may
depend on the non-zero value that is determined in a multi-valued way. The only small
difﬁculty is to ﬁnd this non-zero value without having a test for equality of real numbers:

COMPLEX csqrt(const COMPLEX& z)
{
REAL a,b,c,d,r,s;
COMPLEX y;
long choice;
r= abs (z);

a= real(z);

b= imag(z);

if ( ! bound( b, size(r)-3) ) {
if ( b > 0 ) choice=1; else choice=2;
} else {
if ( a > 0 ) choice=3; else choice=4;
}
c= sqrt( (r+a) / 2 );

d= sqrt( (r-a) / 2 );

switch ( choice ) {
case 1:
y = COMPLEX ( c
,
d
); break;
case 2:
y = COMPLEX ( c
, -d
); break;
case 3:
y = COMPLEX ( -c
, -b/2/c ); break;
case 4:
y = COMPLEX ( b/2/d ,
d
); break;
}
return y;
}

Each value of the variable choice corresponds to one of the following four open
half planes in C: fz j imag (z ) > 0g, fz j imag (z ) < 0g, fz j real(z ) > 0g, and
fz j real(z ) < 0g. So for any z 6= 0, the loop in the program will ﬁnally be left after
setting an appropriate value for choice.
It can easily be veriﬁed that the returned value is indeed one of the two roots of z .
Figure 3 shows results of this function for the square roots on circles with radius 1, 2,
and 3. The results for b < 0 and a < 0 are adjacent, so only three of the four values
for choice can be distinguished. Changing the result for a > 0 to the more ‘natural’
COMPLEX (c,b/2/c) would have the effect that all results are adjacent (leading to
a less interesting ﬁgure).
This solution for the square root is not fully satisfying: We use size to ﬁnd a lower
bound for the nonzero value from a or b. So for z = 0, an inﬁnite loop occurs, and for
arguments near to 0, the complexity grows to inﬁnity.
To overcome both problems, the complex square root can be seen as a limit: For
arguments z with jz j > ", let f ("; z ) be one of the roots of z , otherwise let f ("; z ) = 0
as an approximation. Then simply let " ! 0.
When trying to implement this within the iRRAM, we must face the problem that
for different " or for different approximations of z , the values f ("; z ) might switch
between the two roots of z . But when computing the limit, we may not switch between
the roots, otherwise in different iterations changed ﬂows of control could occur. To
prevent this, the arguments for the operator computing multi-valued limits must fulﬁll
additional properties:
friend COMPLEX limit_mv (COMPLEX f(long p,

2
sqrt(z), |z|=1
sqrt(z), |z|=2
sqrt(z), |z|=3
1.5

1

0.5

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-2
-2

-1.5

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Fig. 3. Values of the complex square root in the iRRAM, using csqrt

long* choice,
const COMPLEX& z),
const REAL& z);

The parameter choice can be interpreted as follows: It selects a subset of the
possible values of the limit that may be computed by f. The (initial) value of 0 has
the interpretation that all the possible values are still allowed. If f changes the value of
choice, then this must correspond to a reduction of the set of allowed values. At the
end of the computation of f, the result of f must be an approximation (with an error of
at most 2p ) to all of the values that still correspond to choice.
To compute the limit, the iRRAM proceeds almost as in the case of the usual limit
operator, i.e. different values of p are checked whether the computation of f(p,choice,z)
leads to an approximation of the limit. The very ﬁrst try starts with choice=0, i.e. f
may approximate any of the possible values. For the other tests (in the same or later
iterations), the value of choice is passed from one computation of f to the next using
the multi-value cache. So a result of a computation of f(p,choice,z) at some stage
in the iRRAM must be a reﬁnement of the previous computations at this stage.
In a full theoretical deﬁnition of the limit operator, its (multi-valued) argument f
would be of signature (e.g.) f : Z  Z  C ! C  Z where f is supposed to be
computable and the second (integer) components of both the argument and the result
of f correspond to the values of choice before and after the call to f. Theoretically,
the whole history of the (ﬁnite!) computations of f could be encoded in this value.
However, in practice only a few essential steps of the computation need to be encoded,
so choosing type long for choice should be far reaching, although this might look
like a very restricted concept at the ﬁrst view.
In the case of the complex square root, the value of choice will need at most one
change: If z is so big compared to the intended precision that 0 is no longer a valid
approximation to the roots of z , choice is changed to indicate in which of the half

planes z is located. This is sufﬁcient to choose one of the roots of z . This choice will
not be changed again. A corresponding implementation being able to compute a square
root for any complex z including 0 looks as follows:
COMPLEX csqrt1(long p, long* choice, const COMPLEX& z)
{ REAL a,b,c,d,r;
COMPLEX y;
r= abs (z);

a= real(z);

b= imag(z);

if ( *choice == 0 ) {
if ( !bound(r, 2*p) )
if ( ! bound(b,p-2) ) {
if ( b > 0 ) *choice=1; else *choice=2;
} else {
if ( a > 0 ) *choice=3; else *choice=4;
}
}
c= sqrt( (r+a) / 2 ); d= sqrt( (r-a) / 2 );
switch ( *choice ) {
case 0:
y = COMPLEX
case 1:
y = COMPLEX
case 2:
y = COMPLEX
case 3:
y = COMPLEX
case 4:
y = COMPLEX
}
return y;

( 0 ,
0 );
( c ,
d );
( c , -d );
( c , b/2/c );
( b/2/d, d );

break;
break;
break;
break;
break;

}
COMPLEX

sqrt(COMPLEX z) { return limit_mv(csqrt1,z); }

11 Optimizing: Hints and Assertions
In the following we brieﬂy discuss three methods to optimize the efﬁciency of programs
for the iRRAM:
– If a part of a numerical algorithm is known to have modulus of continuity significantly larger than in the rest of the program, e.g. if we try to compute a function
with a large ﬁrst derivative, it may improve the overall complexity signiﬁcantly
if we temporarily use a higher precision which may lead to less reiterations. In
this case, the sensitive part of the program can be marked with a pair of functions
stiff_begin() and stiff_end(), where the precision bound is improved
by the ﬁrst function and reset by the second function.
This technique has been used e.g. in the AGM methods for  and log(x). Similar
effects could be achieved by temporarily switching the inﬂuence of the precision
bound on the actual computations from absolute to relative precision (which is not
implemented yet).

The use of these functions is simply a hint to the simulator how to proceed most
efﬁciently. Using these functions might change the ﬂow of control because of the
possibility of changing results from multi-valued functions. However, their use can
not inﬂuence the correctness of a program, only its time complexity.
The following two methods behave different, their use is not only a hint for the
simulator but an assertion that a part of a program has certain special properties
(that can not be veriﬁed by the simulator). The simulator will optimize its behavior
correspondingly
– The multi-value cache is an expensive simulation tool, as each cached results needs
to be stored until the end of the program. This is why the use of multi-valued intrinsics should be reduced to the minimum.
On the other hand, there are many computations leading to a single-valued continuous results although they use such multi-valued decisions. As an example, consider
sin(x) again. It is well known that using a Taylor series in the computation of sin(x)
for large x is a big waste of time. It is better and quite simple to use the periodicity of this trigonometric function for a range reduction and to compute a y of size
=4 or less such that either sin(x) =  sin(y) or sin(x) =  os(y). To do this,
we have to apply multi-valued tests, as we have to distinguish between 4 distinct
cases that later ﬁt together to a result that is single-valued and continuous in x. In
consequence, it would not be necessary to cache these tests.
If such a part of a program is marked with the functions continuous_begin()
and continuous_end(), the caching is temporarily stopped. The programmer
must take care himself that it is impossible to enter or leave the section without
calling the corresponding function (except maybe for reiterations), as this could
easily destroy the consistency of the multi-value cache.
Another important application is found in linear algebra: If we invert a nonsingular
matrix M , the inverse M 1 is determined uniquely and the mapping from M to
M 1 is continuous. Here the classical algorithms based on Gaussian elimination
internally rearrange the matrices due to the size of pivot elements which requires
multi-valued tests that need not to be cached.
– If we know that a sequence of operations has a signiﬁcantly better modulus of
continuity than we achieve through the normal interval arithmetic, we may be able
to reduce the growth of the error bounds using a technique similar to the Lipschitz
limit operator: Instead of calling a function f with known Lipschitz constant 2l
directly, we may use the form lipschitz(f; l; x). Here the precision bound is
increased during the computation, and instead of f (x) we compute f (d) for the
center d of the interval (d  e) representing x. The resulting interval is corrected
according to the Lipschitz constant and the size e of the interval. In consequence,
the error propagation between x and f (x) is almost reduced to l.

12 Overview: Classes and Functions
In the following we give a brief overview of the new classes, operators, and functions,
that are implemented in the iRRAM. Unless explicitly stated, these functions are intrinsic, i.e. their implementations may use private properties of the class REAL and so has
access to the underlying intervals that are hidden to the ordinary user.

We will not repeat the limit operators here, as they have been explained previously
in detail.
Classes
DYADIC is simply a wrapper for the underlying multiple precision arithmetic.
The most important class REAL is derived from a basic (mostly hidden) class
METRIC_OBJECT that provides a rudimentary garbage collection necessary for
the reiterations and that is the basic class for the limit operators. Further derived
classes are COMPLEX, REALMATRIX, SPARSEREALMATRIX, where the latter
aims at very large but mostly empty matrices.
All those classes have a destructor ~, a default constructor, and a copy constructor
= for assignments.
Real arithmetic
REALs can be constructed from int, long, char*, double, DYADIC, and from
REAL itself. In consequence, there are corresponding implicit type conversions, e.g.
x=REAL("3.1415") can be written as x="3.1415".
The overloaded arithmetic operators ‘x+y’, ‘x-y’, ‘-y’, ‘x*y’, and ‘x/y’ can be
used in a naive way, but a division by REAL(0) leads to an inﬁnite loop.
The usual binary tests ‘x<y’, ‘x<=y’,‘x>y’, and ‘x>=y’ exist, but there is no test
on equality or inequality of reals! These tests will lead to inﬁnite loops if x and y
are equal. So ‘x<y’ and ‘x<=y’ really are the same function!
The multi-valued functions ‘size(x)’, ‘positive(x,p)’, ‘bound(x,p)’,
‘approx(x,p)’, and ‘round(x)’ have been explained previously. As round(x)
delivers a result of type long (which is very restricted in size), there is a corresponding function round2(x) with a result of type REAL.
Quite often, multiplication with a (positive or negative) power of 2 is necessary,
which is implemented as an intrinsic function scale(x,k).
Finally there is a library of mathematical functions that are not intrinsic (i.e. they are
deﬁned essentially ‘high level’ but usually with use of the limit operators). These
function are still very efﬁcient, as the necessary overhead is small.
There is a small set of algebraic functions: abs(x), power(x,n) sqrt(x),
root(x,n), modulo(x,y), maximum(x,y),and minimum(x,y), furthermore there are transcendental functions like exp(x), log(x), and a full set of
trigonometric functions and their inverses, from sin(x) to acosech(x). In addition, the special numbers pi()=  = 3:1415:::, ln2()= log(2) = 0:6931:::
and euler()= e = 2:1718::: are deﬁned (necessarily as functions).
Matrix arithmetic
The classes REALMATRX and SPAREREALMATRIX deal with matrices of real
components. As they are derived form the class METRIC_OBJECT, limit operators
can be applied. The corresponding algorithms are not intrinsic, as they all are derived from real arithmetic! The most important constructors are REALMATRIX(r,c)
and SPARSEREALMATRIX(r,c) for a (sparse) matrix of r rows and c columns,
as well as REALMATRIX(m) and SPARSEREALMATRIX(m) to get a copy of a
matrix m. To access matrix elements, the parentheses () have been overloaded,
allowing assignments like m(1,2)="3.1414".

Basic matrix arithmetic ‘m1+m2’, ‘m1-m2’, ‘m1*m2’, ‘m1/m2’ is implemented,
where the latter computes a solution of the linear system M2  X = M1 by Gaussian elimination (if M2 is not singular). Multiplication m*x and division m/x by
scalar values x are deﬁned. In addition, eye(n), zeroes(r,c) or ones(r,c)
deliver the unit matrix, or a matrix full of zeroes or ones.
The matrix exponential exp(m) :=
mk =k! is an example for the implementation of a matrix transcendental.
Complex arithmetic
COMPLEX numbers are a further example for the possibility of user-deﬁned data
types. Only a few functions have been implemented: basic arithmetic, abs(z),
real(z), imag(z), as well as the complex square root that has been the central
example for a multi-valued limit in section 10.
Input and Output
The special role of I/O and the functions rscanf, rprintf, rshow(x,w) and
rwrite(x,p,w) has already been mentioned in section 8.
Special Functions and Operators
The special functions continuous_begin(), continuous_end(), that modify the caching strategy, as well as stiff_begin(), stiff_end(), and the
operator lipschitz(f,l,x), that modify the error propagation, have been discussed in the section 11.

P

13 Importing special MP functions
One of the aims of the iRRAM is to get an abstract level of computation independent
from the underlying MP package. This would imply that only the intersection of all the
functions of the different MP packages could be used. To get access to special functions
of the MP packages, the interface to the MP can be extended.
This possibility has been used for the multiple precision square root in order to get
an implementation of sqrt that is much faster than the version shown in section 10:
The interface to the backend of the iRRAM for Longreal with low-level GMP routines
(which can be found is LRGMP_interface.h) contains the lines
#define MP_has_sqrt 1
#define MP_sqrt(z1,z,n) Dyadic_LRSQRT(&(z1),&(z),n)

In REALLIB.cc, where most of the higher level mathematical functions are implemented, there is a corresponding #ifdef MP_has_sqrt that switches at compile
time between a high level version from section 10 and a faster intrinsic version using
MP_sqrt.

14 The iRRAM and IEEE 754
Although the iRRAM implements exact arithmetic, so that program should run forever,
it can be used as an extensible library of functions with variable precision as long as
not input or output of real numbers is used: If the programmer deﬁnes an own version

of main, he is able to call iRRAM_exec(compute) several times within his program, even with several different functions instead compute(). As the argument of
iRRAM_exec is of type void (), compute may neither have arguments not return
a result. So the only possibility to pass data between main and compute is to use
global variables. If these variables are of type DYADIC, we essentially get a new function extending the multiple precision backend. For example, the cosine function (that is
e.g. still missing in GMP) could be implemented similar to the following way:
DYADIC glob_arg,glob_result;
long glob_precision;
void compute_sin() {
glob_result=approx(cos(REAL(glob_arg)),glob_precision);
}
DYADIC cos(DYADIC x, long p) {
glob_arg=x;
glob_precision=p;
iRRAM_exec(compute_cos);
return glob_result;
}

Here we use three global variables: for the argument, the result and the precision of
the computation. Please remember: we are implementing a ﬁnite precision version of
cosine using our exact real version, so we have to specify the precision of the result!
Current multiple precision packages like [Zi00] try to smoothly extend the current
hardware ﬂoating point arithmetic and try to stick to the principles of IEEE 754 ﬂoating
point arithmetic. This implies that certain shortcomings of earlier hardware like nonmonotonic behavior for monotonic functions should be avoided. One similar aspect
are exact rounding modes, i.e. it should be possible to specify that the result of MP
operations is either the next, the greatest smaller or the smallest larger MP number
compared to the exact result.
From the view of exact real arithmetic, exact rounding modes are similar to testing
whether two reals are equal: Nontrivial single-valued real functions with a discrete set
of possible values are necessarily discontinuous and hence not computable! On the
other hand, any correct implementation of a theoretically monotonic function using
exact arithmetic will be monotonic, and any ‘irregular’ non-monotonic behavior of the
conversion to discrete sets can be completely explained using multi-valued functions,
so exact rounding is not an issue in exact arithmetic.
It would even be possible to create MP routines with exact rounding for functions
f using the iRRAM as backend, as long as the exact values f (d) for MP numbers d
are not exactly representable as MP numbers again. E.g. for os(d) with d 6= 0, we
could simply iterate the procedure above with different values for glob_precision
until we get enough different bits to allow the exact rounding. It should be sufﬁcient
almost always to choose an initial bounding precision just smaller than necessary for the
expected value to decide the rounding without any further iterations. Rare exceptions
with higher several iterations could surely be tolerated.

15 Exploring the Borders
In the following we present a few examples for the time complexity of the iRRAM. All
computations have been performed using an AMD Athlon 800 MHz (512 KD cache,
slot A) on an ASUS mainboard K7M equipped with 256 MB 100 MHz SDRAM. The
backend was LRGMP using GMP 3.1, operating system was Linux with kernel 2.4.0test4. Programs had been compiled with gcc, version 2.95.2.

p

– Selected values and functions
Compute n decimals of 1=3,  , log(1=3), and sin(1=3):
Number n of Decimals 10
100 1000 10000 100000
Time for conversion
8 s 37 s 39 s 14 ms 1.5 s
Time for 
140 ms 9.1 s
Time for inversion
3.4 s 6.0 s 80 s 2.9 ms 140 ms
Time for 1=3
17 s 30 s 132 s 4.7 ms 360 ms
Time for log(1=3)
290 s 740 s 6 ms 240 ms 22.9 s
Time for sin(1=3)
71 s 210 s 3.5 ms 450 ms 157 s

p

As the internal format of the multiple precision backend is in binary form, we have
to split the computation time is two parts: he computations, a part of the time was
taken for the conversion from the internal binary format to the the decimal form,
which is not optimized yet and has complexity of order O(n2 ). The other given
times are do not include this conversion time, so it has to be added to the other
given values in order to get the full time for computation with the desired precision
including the output.
 is computed using a quartically convergent algorithm due to the Borwein brothers
[Ba88,Bo87]. Due to an internal optimization, we were not able to measure the time
necessary for the computation of  for small n.
p is implemented with a variant of Heron’s quadratic convergent
The square root
method, but computed with variable precision as in [Bt76].
The implementation of the natural logarithm log uses an AGM method based on
ideas from [Sch90]. It needs good precomputed approximations for  and log(2).
The measured times are without these precomputations, so they are valid for all but
the ﬁrst evaluation of log.
sin uses a Taylor series approach after an appropriate range reduction that also uses
a precomputed  . The given times are without this precomputation.
– Iterated function systems
Compute the iterates xi of the so called logistic function xi = f (xi 1 ) = 3:75 
xi 1  (1 x 1 ), where we start with x0 = 0:5 and print the ﬁrst 6 decimal places
of each xi :
Index i
1000
5000
10000
50000 100000
Value xi
+.791747 +.814694 +.824205 +.283081 +.666947
Max. Bounding Precision -2166
-10888 -21407 -102635 -200601
Execution Time
60 ms
1.56 s
8s
385 s
2054 s

Using double instead of REAL, beginning from x80 the 6th digit is incorrect, x90
has only one correct digit left, and ﬁnally from x100 , all digits are wrong:
REAL

double

x60 +.7990863343 0.79908633 70
x70 +.4521952998 0.4521952 586
x80 +.8561779966 0.85617 59906
x90 +.7399137486 0.7 400517104
x100 +.8882939922 0. 9017659679
x110 +.7156795292 0. 2201217854
This example has been taken from [Ku96], where a similar table was shown up
to x450 using the software package C-XSC [Kl93]. Unfortunately, this package is
quite restricted in the mantissa length as well as the exponent range, such that it is
impossible to compute x500 using the package.
– Matrix arithmetic
Compute an approximation (with maximal error 2 50 ) of the inverse of the (bad
conditioned) Hilbert matrix Hn of size n  n using the built-in matrix arithmetic
(i.e. with Gaussian elimination):
Dimension n
50
100
150
200
250
Max. bounding precision -1037 -2745 -4372 -5502 -6915
Used Memory
1.46MB 9.2MB 40 MB 81MB 152 MB
Execution Time
3.2 s
79 s 457 s 1200 s 3052 s
Compute an approximation (with maximal error 2 50 ) to the inverse of the well
conditioned matrix Hn + 1n of size n  n:
Dimension n
50
100
150
200
250
500
Max. bounding precision -100
-100
-100
-100 -100 -162
Used Memory
0.5 MB 2.1 MB 4.7 MB 8.4 MB 13 MB 52MB
Execution Time
0.7 s 5.4 s
19 s
45s
91 s 1237 s
Obviously, the condition of the matrix has big inﬂuence on the necessary bounding precision, which explains the big differences in execution time and memory
consumption between the two examples.
The results should be compared to the results of similar computations using e.g.
octave (a freely available high-level interactive language for numerical computations), where optimized routines working with the limited precision of the hardware
are used (without error control):
Octave is already unable to invert the Hilbert matrix of size 12 (giving a warning
matrix singular to machine precision). ON the other hand, the inversion of the well-conditioned matrix Hn + 1 with n = 500 takes only 12 s, so
the iRRAM is about a factor of 65 slower. This factor is different for other types
of CPUs, e.g. for an AMD K6-200 with its weaker ﬂoating point performance we
get a factor of 35. Please have in mind that here we essentially have to compare a
software solution with hardware (on the same CPU)!

16 Future Work
The current state of the iRRAM allows reliable and efﬁcient exact arithmetic. But of
course, many enhancements and optimizations can be imagined. In the following we
list just a few of them:
– Until know, the iRRAM has only been tested using the GNU g++ compiler and
under Linux. A port to other popular systems should be easy.
– There should be a better garbage collection that clears all temporary objects whenever a reiteration happens. At the moment, there is only a restricted garbage collector that is able to recover all memory occupied by objects derived from METRIC_OBJECT.
However, any memory allocated on the stack using alloca is freed automatically,
as the reiterations are implemented using longjmp. On the other hand, big applications will use almost all their memory for real variables.
– The set of DYADIC functions should be extended using the techniques described in
this paper, also COMPLEX versions of the transcendental and trigonometric functions would be important.
– The algorithms for exp and for the trigonometric functions should be further improved using AGM methods, see e.g. [Bt76].
– New data types for (full range) integers or rationals should be added.

References
[Ba88] D.H. Bailey, The computation of  to 29,360,000 Decimal Digits Using Borweins Quartically Convergent Algorithm Mathematics of Computation Vol. 50 Number 181 (1988) 238296
[Bo87] J.M. Borwein & P.B. Borwein, Pi and the AGM, A study in analythic number theory,
Wiley, New York, 1987
[BoCa90] H. Boehm & R. Cartwright, Exact Real Arithmetic: Formulating real numbers as functions. In T. D., editor, Research Topics in Functional Programming, 43-64 (Addison-Wesley,
1990)
[BSS89] L. Blum & M. Shub & S. Smale, On a theory of computation and complexity over the
real numbers: NP-completeness, recursive functions and universal machines, Bulletin of the
AMS 21, 1, July 1989
[Bt75] R.P. Brent, The complexity of multiple precision arithmetic, Proc. Seminar on Complexity of Computational Problem Solving, Queensland U. Press, Brisbane, Australia (1975)
126-165
[Bt76] R.P. Brent, Fast multiple precision evaluation of elementary functions, J. ACM 23 (1976)
242-251
[Bt78] R.P. Brent, A Fortran multiple precision package, ACM Trans. Math. Software 4 (1978),
pp 57-70
[CoAa89] Cook, S.A. und Aanderaa, S.O., On the minimum computation time of functions,
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 142 (1969) 291-314
[FiSt74] Fischer, M.J. und Stockmeyer, L.J. Fast on-line integer multiplication, J. Comput. System Scis. 9 (1974) 317-331
[Br96] V. Brattka, Recursive characterisation of computable real-valued functions and relations,
Theoret. Comput. Sci. 162 (1996),47-77

[BrHe95] V. Brattka & P. Hertling, Feasible Real Random Access Machines, Informatik Berichte
193 - 12/1995, FernUniversität Hagen,
[BrHe94] V. Brattka & P. Hertling, Continuity and Computability of Relations, Informatik
Berichte 164 - 9/1994, FernUniversität Hagen,
[Br99] V. Brattka, Recursive and Computable Operations over Topological Structures, Thesis,
Informatik Berichte 255 - 7/1999, FernUniversität Hagen
[EdPo97] A. Edalat & P. Potts, A new representation for exact real numbers,
Proc. of Mathematical Foundations of Programming Semantics 13, Electronic
notes in Theoretical Computer Science 6, Elsevier Science B.V., 1997, URL:
www.elsevier.nl/locate/entcs/volume6.html
[Gr00] T. Granlund, GMP 3.1, http://www.swox.com/gmp/
[GL00] P. Gowland, D. Lester, The Correctness of an Implementation of Exact Arithmetic, 4th
Conference on Real Numbers and Computers, 2000, Dagstuhl, 125-140
[HM00] S. Heinrich & E. Novak et al., The Inverse of the Star-Discrepancy depends linearly on
the Dimension, Acta Arithmetica, to appear
[Kl93] R. Klatte & U. Kulisch et al., C-XSC , a C++ Class Library for Extended Scientiﬁc
Computing (Springer, Berlin 1993)
[Ko91] K. Ko, Complexity Theory of Real Functions, (Birkhäuser, Boston 1991)
[Ku96] U. Kulisch, Memorandum über Computer, Arithmetik und Numerik (Universität Karlsruhe, Institut für angewandte Mathematik)
[Mm96] V. Ménissier-Morain, Arbitrary precision real arithmetic: design and algorithms, J. Symbolic Computation, 1996, 11
[Mu88] Müller, N.Th., Untersuchungen zur Komplexität reeller Funktionen, Dissertation (FernUniversität Hagen, 1988)
[Mu93] N.Th. Müller, Polynomial Time Computation of Taylor Series, Proc. 22 JAIIO - PANEL
’93, Part 2, Buenos Aires, 1993, 259-281
(also available at http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/˜mueller)
[Mu96] Müller, N.Th., Towards a real Real RAM: a Prototype using C++, (preliminary version), Second Workshop on Constructivity and Complexity in Analysis, Forschungsbericht
Mathematik-Informatik, Universität Trier 96-44, Seiten 59-66 (1996) (also available at
http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/˜mueller)
[Mu97] N.Th. Müller, Towards a real RealRAM: a Prototype using C++, Proc. 6th International
Conference on Numerical Analysis, Plovdiv, 1997
[Mu98] N.Th. Müller, Implementing limits in an interactive RealRAM, 3rd Conference on Real
Numbers and Computers, 1998, Paris, 13-26
[Mu00] N.Th. Müller, A Note on how to compute Multi-Valued Functions draft, in preparationprinciples of IEEE 754 ﬂoating point arithmetic.
[Rio94] M. Riordan, ftp://ripem.msu.edu/pub/bignum/BIGNUMS.TXT
[Sch90] A. Schönhage, Numerik analytischer Funktionen und Komplexität, Jber. d. Dt. Math.Verein. 92 (1990) 1-20
[TZ99] J.V. Tucker, J.I. Zucker, Computation by ‘While’ programs on topological partial algebras, Theoretical Computer Science 219 (1999) 379-420
[We87] K. Weihrauch, Computability (volume 9 of: EATCS Monographs on Theoretical Computer Science), (Springer, Berlin, 1987)
[We95] K. Weihrauch, A Simple Introduction to Computable Analysis, Informatik Berichte 171
- 2/1995, FernUniversität Hagen
[We97] Weihrauch, K., A Foundation for Computable Analysis, Proc. DMTCS´96, (Springer,
Singapore, 1997) 66-89
[Zi00] P. Zimmermann, MPFR: A Library for Multiprecision Floating-Point Arithmetic with
Exact Rounding, 4th Conference on Real Numbers and Computers, 2000, Dagstuhl, 89-90,
see also http://www.loria.fr/projets/mpfr/

