Implementing real numbers with RZ

      Andrej Bauer       Iztok Kavkler

       Faculty of mathematics and physics
             University of Ljubljana
                    Slovenia


              18 June 2007




                                            1 / 14
Introduction

 Currently, there are two kinds of computable real number
 implementations.
   1   The implementations strictly adhering to the theory, e.g.
       extracted from formalizations of reals in Coq. They tend to be
       rather inefficient.
   2   Fast implementations based on interval arithmetic, but with
       only informal theoretical background.
 Our goal is to get the best of both: provide real arithmetic that is
 both efficient and easily formalizable.
   1   Extract specification from the theory—automatically, if
       possible.
   2   Leave the programmer some freedom to produce fast
       implementation.


                                                                        2 / 14
RZ




     Converts theories of constructive mathematics to OCaml
     module type specifications.
     Based on the realizability implementation of logic.
         The computational content is identified and translated to types
         and function prototypes.
         The code is annotated with assertions (that can be proved in
         classical logic).
         Allows any implementation, as long as it follows the produced
         specification—it is possible to use OCaml to its full potential.




                                                                            3 / 14
RZ example



 The statement that every complex number has a square root can
 be expressed in RZ as
 Axiom sqrt:     ∀z:complex, ∃w:complex, z = mul w w.

 It produces the following OCaml specification.
 val sqrt : complex → complex
 (** assertion sqrt : ∀(z:kcomplexk),
   let p=sqrt z in p:kcomplexk ∧ z ≈complex mul p p *)

 There is no requirement for extensionality—a multi-valued
 function realizes the above specification.




                                                                 4 / 14
Constructive and computable reals

 Usually, real numbers are represented by sequences {rn } with
 rapid Cauchy convergence property

                         |rn − rn+1 | < 2−n .                    (1)


     The corresponding OCaml implementation is a function
     r: nat -> rational with property (1).
     The problem: every operation has to preserve rapid
     convergence which usually results in estimates that
     overshoot the precision. We end up computing much more
     than is needed.
     Our implementation via the interval domain does not have
     this drawback.


                                                                       5 / 14
Overview of the implementation



 We formally axiomatized the following theories:
  1   the ring of integers (with natural numbers as subset),
  2   the ring of dyadic rationals,
  3   the poset of intervals with dyadic endpoints,
  4   the interval domain,
  5   the field of reals.
 These were translated by RZ to OCaml specifications which were
 implemented by hand.




                                                                  6 / 14
Integers




    Integers are defined as a decidable ordered ring with unit
    whose nonnegative elements are isomorphic to natural
    numbers (satisfy the axiom of induction).
    For implementation, we use fast integer library Numerix (or
    GMP).




                                                                  7 / 14
Dyadic rationals


     Precise rational operations are costly: the numerator and the
     denominator grow rapidly with every operation.
     As most other implementations, we use dyadic rationals

                     D = m · 2−k m ∈ Z, k ∈ N .
                        



     Axiomatization. A dyadic ring is a decidable Archimedean
     ordered ring in which 2 is invertible.
     Every dyadic ring admits approximate division.
     In a dyadic ring, every element can be approximated by an
     element of the form n · 2−k with the error at most 2−k .



                                                                     8 / 14
Dyadic intervals




 Axiomatization. A dyadic interval is an interval [p, q] with p, q
 dyadic rationals.
     Define order [p, q] v [p0 , q 0 ] as [p, q] ⊇ [p0 , q 0 ].
     We also adjoin the bottom element undefined.
     Dyadic intervals form a conditional upper semilattice.
     We axiomatize approximate interval arithmetic, which allows
     us to trade precision for efficiency.




                                                                     9 / 14
The interval domain


 Axiomatization. The interval domain IR is the ω-chain completion
 of the poset ID of dyadic intervals.
     An element x ∈ IR is represented by a chain of dyadic
     intervals
                   [p1 , q1 ] v [p2 , q2 ] v [p3 , q3 ] v · · ·


     x can be thought of as the interval [a, b] where
         a = sup pi is a lower real
         b = inf qi is an upper real
     Interval arithmetic operations on IR are defined as
     continuous extensions of the corresponding approximate
     operations on dyadic intervals.



                                                                    10 / 14
Real numbers


 Axiomatization. Real numbers form a Cauchy complete
 Archimedean ordered field.
 Implementation. Real numbers are the maximal elements of IR.
     A real x ∈ IR is represented as a chain of dyadic intervals.
     Crucial: no requirement on the speed of convergence.
     Arithmetic operations are inherited from the interval domain.
     Archimedean property is realized by a function
     val approx_to: real → nat → dyadic
     that finds approximations of order 2−n . Correctness depends
     on Markov principle.




                                                                     11 / 14
Limits
 The completeness of the reals is witnessed by the function lim:
 val lim: (nat → real) → (nat → real) → real

 The parameters are the sequence of real numbers (an )n and the
 sequence of Cauchy error bounds (rn )n .

                        rn ≥ ai − aj       ∀i, j ≥ n

 This formulation is equivalent but easier to use than the strict
 Cauchy sequence version.
 Lemma
 Assume that rn & 0 monotonously. Then the sequence (cn )n
                          ∞ 
                          _   (k )      (k )   (k )    (k ) 
                   cn =          an − r n , an + r n                (2)
                          k =0

 is a chain in IR and the limit of (an )n is its supremum.
                                                                          12 / 14
The Markov principle



 Markov principle. A loop which does not diverge terminates.
     A real number is represented as a chain of dyadic intervals
     whose widths are not bounded away from 0.
     We can always find arbitrarily good approximation by
     unbounded search (equivalent to MP).
     The unbounded search is costly as it makes the time
     complexity of the program unpredictable. Therefore it is only
     used in approx_to which we (so far) avoid in the
     implementation of other functions.




                                                                     13 / 14
Future directions




     Improve performance and extend current implementation to a
     useful library.
     Axiomatize and implement other structures in analysis and
     topology.




                                                                  14 / 14
