Edinburgh Research Explorer

Lazy functional algorithms for exact real functionals
23rd International Symposium, MFCS'98 Brno, Czech Republic, August 24–28, 1998
Proceedings
Citation for published version:
Simpson, A 1998, Lazy functional algorithms for exact real functionals: 23rd International Symposium,
MFCS'98 Brno, Czech Republic, August 24–28, 1998 Proceedings. in L Brim, J Gruska & J Zlatuska (eds),
Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 1998: 23rd International Symposium, MFCS'98 Brno,
Czech Republic, August 24–28, 1998 Proceedings. vol. 1450, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
1450, Springer, pp. 456-464. https://doi.org/10.1007/BFb0055795


Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.1007/BFb0055795


Link:
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer


Document Version:
Peer reviewed version



Published In:
Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 1998




General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.


Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.




Download date: 06. Sep. 2026
Simpson, A. (1998). Lazy functional algorithms for exact real functionals. In Brim, L., Gruska,
J., & Zlatuska, J. (Eds.), Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 1998. (pp. 456-464).
(Lecture Notes in Computer Science). Springer Berlin / Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/BFb0055795




                                   Lazy Functional Algorithms for
                                       Exact Real Functionals
                                                     Alex K. Simpson
                              LFCS, Department of Computer Science, University of Edinburgh,
                                 JCMB, King's Buildings, Edinburgh, EH9 3JZ, Scotland
                                               <Alex.Simpson@dcs.ed.ac.uk>



                           Abstract. We show how functional languages can be used to write pro-
                           grams for real-valued functionals in exact real arithmetic. We concen-
                           trate on two useful functionals: de nite integration, and the functional
                           returning the maximum value of a continuous function over a closed in-
                           terval. The algorithms are a practical application of a method, due to
                           Berger, for computing quanti ers over streams. Correctness proofs for
                           the algorithms make essential use of domain theory.

                     1 Introduction
                     In exact real number computation, in nite representations of reals are employed
                     to avoid the usual rounding errors that are inherent in oating point compu-
                     tation [4{6,17]. For certain real number computations that are highly sensitive
                     to small variations in the input, such rounding errors become inordinately large
                     and the use of oating-point algorithms can lead to completely erroneous results
                     [1,14]. In such situations, exact real number computation provides guaranteed
                     correctness, although at the (probably inevitable) price of a loss of eciency.
                     How to improve eciency is a eld of active research [9].
                         Lazy functional programming provides a natural implementational style for
                     exact real algorithms. One reason is that lazy functional languages support lazy
                     in nite data structures, such as streams, which can be coveniently used to repre-
                     sent real numbers. The ecient management of such in nite data structures (for
                     example, using call-by-need to avoid repeated computations) can be entrusted
                     to the language implementer, leaving the programmer free to concentrate on
                     the essentials of the algorithms being developed. Also, functional programming
                     naturally supports the recursive de nition of functions, which is the most useful
                     method of de ning exact functions on real numbers. Such considerations were
                     important motivating factors in [4,5,17,6,7,10].
                         One principal distinguishing feature of functional languages is their accep-
                     tance of functions as rst-class values, and the associated possibility of passing
                     functions as arguments to other function(al)s. In the context of exact real number
                     computation, this raises the question of whether it is possible to write functional
                     algorithms to implement useful functionals on real numbers. In [8], Edalat and
                     Escardo show how to extend Real PCF [10] with primitive functionals for de -
                     nite integration, and for the maximum value attained by a continuous function
over a closed interval. However, their operational semantics is nondeterminis-
tic, and requires a parallel evaluation strategy which is not readily supported
within the context of the standard sequential functional languages. The problem
of whether such algorithms are possible sequentially was originally posed in Di
Gianantonio's PhD thesis [6], where it was conjectured that they are not.
    In this paper we show that Di Gianantonio's conjecture is false. We provide
sequential functional algorithms for the speci c and useful functionals of inte-
gration and maximum. The algorithms rely on a clever, but little known, idea
of Berger, who showed how to compute quanti ers over predicates on streams
sequentially [2]. Berger's algorithms deserve to be better known, especially in
the light of their possible applications.
    The work of Berger, Di Gianantonio, Escardo and Edalat, referred to above,
was carried out in the context of the minimal functional language PCF [15]
(and extensions of it). It would be fully possible to write this paper in the same
setting, but we prefer instead to adopt a less spartan approach. The goal of this
paper is to describe and verify particular functional algorithms. We therefore
use an easily readable, although not formally de ned, functional pseudocode
for expressing algorithms (just as an informal imperative pseudocode is used to
specify algorithms throughout computer science). We also make use of a simple
type discipline to specify the domains and codomains of functions.
    Not only does the type discipline improve the readability of the code, it
also serves a more signi cant purpose. The statements of correctness of the
algorithms and their veri cation make essential use of a denotational semantics
de ned in terms of the type structure. Indeed it is a further bene t of using
a functional language that a denotational semantics is easily obtained using
standard constructions on complete partial orders. Because we have not formally
de ned the language, we cannot formally de ne its semantics either. Nonetheless,
the denotational semantics of functional programming languages is now well
enough understood that it is possible to use such semantics in an informal way
with full mathematical rigour. Our approach is to use denotational semantics
as one more mathematical tool for verifying informally speci ed algorithms,
alongside all the other tools available from the body of mathematics as a whole.
    Perhaps what is most interesting about the use of denotational semantics in
this paper is that it goes beyond the mere existence of xed-points and their ba-
sic properties. Instead, the correctness proofs make use of topological properties
(moduli of continuity) of the denotations of higher-order functions. Understand-
ing the denotational semantics is helpful even to appreciate the correctness of
the algorithms informally. In order to verify the algorithms rigorously, some use
of domain theory appears to be essential.

2 Types and their Denotations
In our functional pseudocode, we assume basic datatypes like int, the type of
integers, bool, the type of booleans, as well as some convenient nite types:
  type two = {0,1}
  type three = {-1,0,1}
We assume that two is a subtype of three in the obvious way (so we shall
not bother to include explicit coercions between them). The type constructors
we use are A ! B, function space, A  B, cartesian product, and A stream.
Function application is assumed to be lazy. Mainly for denotational simplicity,
we interpret  as a lazy product (thus a pair may converge in one component but
not the other). The behaviour of streams is best explained via the denotational
semantics.
    For the denotational semantics, we use directed-complete partial orders with
least element (henceforth cpos) for interpreting datatypes, and continuous func-
tions between them for interpreting programs (see e.g. [12]). In Sec. 3 we refer to
cpos as topological spaces, understanding them as carrying the Scott topology.
    Given a set X, we write X? for the at cpo with least element ? and with all
other elements taken from the set X. Basic types are interpreted as at cpos by:
[ int] = Z?; [ bool] = B ? where B = ftrue ; false g; [ two] = 2? where 2 = f0; 1g;
and [ three] = 3? where 3 = f?1; 0; 1g. The function space is interpreted as the
cpo, [ A ! B] , of all continuous functions from [ A] to [ B] ordered pointwise.The
interpretation of the product type, [ A  B] , is the straightforward cartesian
product of [ A] and [ B] (as partially ordered sets).
    Streams will be denoted by possibly in nite sequences, so we develop some
notation for these. For a set X we write: X  for the set of nite sequences
of its elements; X ! for the set of in nite sequences; and X 1 for the set of all
sequences, i.e. X 1 = X  [ X ! . For any sequence , we write j j for the (possibly
in nite) length of and (i) (where 0  i < j j) for the (i + 1)-th element of .
We use textual juxtaposition, , for the concatenation of a nite sequence
with an arbitrary sequence . We write dn for the largest nite pre x, , of
such that j j  n. For x 2 X we write ?!   x for the in nite constant sequence. In
the paper, we shall only ever use streams formed from base types. These have a
straightforward interpretation. If [ A] = X? then [ A stream] = X 1 with 
if and only if is a pre x of . We write hd : X 1 ! X? and tl : X 1 ! X 1 for
the evident head and tail functions. The \cons" operation on streams (written
:: in our pseudocode) is the evident left-strict function from X?  X 1 to X 1 .


3 Real Numbers: Representation and Semantics
In order to write algorithms for functions and functionals on the reals, we rst
need to choose a representation for real numbers. It is well known that the
standard base n notation for reals does not provide an adequate representation,
as many simple functions (e.g. addition) are not computable exactly. However,
many alternative choices of adequate representation are available. There are
discussions of these issues in e.g. [6,9].
    We shall use one of the simplest possible representations: a modi cation of
the standard binary representation using negative digits. We consider an in nite
sequence 2 3! (recall that 3 = f?1; 0; 1g) as representing the real number
                            q( ) = 1
                                    P (i)  2?(i+1)
                                       i=0
This de nes a surjective function q from 3! to I, where we write Ifor the closed
interval [?1; 1]. The whole real line can be represented using a mantissa from
3! and an exponent from Z, thus (z; ) 2 Z 3! represents the real number
2z  q( ). This representation will be used in the full version of the paper, but,
for lack of space, is not considered further in this conference version.
    We use the natural type de nition to implement the representation.
  type interval = three stream

There is, however, a mismatch between the datatype and the representation of
reals. We have that [ interval] = 31 , whereas only elements in the subset 3!
have been given interpretations as real numbers.
     Just as not all values of type interval represent real numbers, neither do all
functions of type interval ! interval represent functions on real numbers.
We use the denotational semantics to distinguish those that do. For greater
generality we work with n-ary functions.
     An arbitrary function  : (31 )n ! 31 is said to be total if it restricts to a
function  : (3! )n ! 3! . Clearly ,
                                      when it exists, is unique. Similarly,a function
 : (3 ) ! 3 is said to be real if there exists a function ~ : In ! Isuch that, for
       ! n      !
all 1; : : :; n 2 3! , it holds that q(( 1 ; : : :; n)) = ~(q( 1); : : :; q( n)). Again
~ is uniquely determined (because q is surjective). Putting the two together, we
say that  : (31 )n ! 31 is real-total if it is total and  is real, in which case
we write ~ : In ! I for the unique induced function.
     A functional program of type interval ! interval will always be denoted
by a continuous  : 31 ! 31 . By topological trivialities, if we endow 3! with
the subspace topology of the Scott topology on 31 , and we endow I with the
quotient topology of 3! under q, then, for any continuous real-total , we have
that  and ~ are continuous. The proposition below makes this observation more
interesting.
Proposition 1.
1. The induced topologies on 3! and I are the product and Euclidean topologies
   respectively.
2. For any continuous f : In ! I, there exists a real  : (3! )n ! 3! such that
   f = ~.
3. For any continuous  : (3! )n ! 3! there exists a total  : (31 )n ! 31
   such that  = .
    In the full version of the paper the de nitions and results in this section
will be related to work on totality in domain theory [2,3, 16], and to topological
injectivity (and projectivity) results [11].

4 Moduli of Continuity and Stream Quanti ers
Consider any continuous function  : 21 ! X? where X is any set. We say that
f is total if, for all 2 2! , it holds that ( ) 2 X.
Proposition 2. For any total  : 21 ! X? there exists n 2 N such that, for
all 2 21 , it holds that ( ) = ( dn ).
We call the least n satisfying the property stated in the proposition the inten-
sional modulus of continuity of , and we write imc() for it.
Corollary 1. For any total  : 21 ! X? there exists n 2 N such that, for all
  ; 2 2! , it holds that dn = dn implies ( ) = ( ).
We call the smallest such n the extensional modulus of continuity of , and we
write emc() for it. Obviously emc()  imc(). In the full version of the paper
there will be a discussion of the relative bene ts of the two notions of modulus.
    Our rst application, due to Berger [2], is to provide a universal quanti er
for total predicates on two stream. The algorithm is presented in Fig. 1 below.

witness-not: (two stream    !   bool)  ! two stream
witness-not (P ) =
  lazylet w = witness-not (v: P (0 :: v))
    in if P (0 :: w) then 1 :: witness-not (v: P (1 :: v))
                     else 0 :: w

forall : (two stream    !
                       bool)      !
                                 bool
forall (P ) = P (witness-not P )

                    Fig. 1. Algorithms for the stream quanti er

Proposition 3. For any total  : 21 ! B ? :
                            
             [ forall] () = true   if, for all 2 2! , ( ) = true
                              false otherwise
Proof. One proves, by induction on imc(), that, for all total  : 21 ! B ? : if
there exists 2 2! such that ( ?)!= false then [ witness-not] () is one such
 ; otherwise [ witness-not] () = 1 . The proposition follows easily.         ut
5 Functional Algorithms for Maximum and Integration
The denotation of every program of type interval ! interval will be a con-
tinous function  from 31 to 31 . If  is real-total then there is a corresponding
continuous ~ : I! I. Our goal in this paper is to show how Berger's algorithms
can be applied to the practical problem of computing the values of functionals
acting on continuous functions on I.
    We shall concentrate on two basic and useful functionals: the functional that
  nds the maximum value attained by a continuous function over the closed
interval [0; 1], and the function that computes the de nite integral of a continuous
function over [0; 1]. That such maximum values and de nite integrals exist for
all continuous functions are very basic results in analysis. Observe that both
operations return values in I.
5.1 Maximum
The algorithm for the functional max-fun is presented in Fig. 2. A rst lemma
states the important properties of the main auxiliary function de ned there.

sub-one: interval      ! interval
sub-one (1 :: r) =    ?1 :: r
sub-one (0 :: r) =    ??!1 :: sub-one(r)
          ?
sub-one ( 1 :: r) =    ?1
max-real: interval        interval    ! interval
max-real (d1 :: r1 ; d2 :: r2 ) =
              ?
  let d = d1 d2 in case d of           2 then d1 :: r1
                                       1 then d1 :: max-real(r1 ; sub-one(r2 ))
                                       0 then d1 :: max-real(r1 ; r2 )
                                      ?1 then d2 :: max-real(sub-one(r1 ); r2 )
                                      ?2 then d2 :: r2
max-fun: (interval    ! interval)       !
                                       interval
max-fun (f ) =
                    ?!
 let d = head (f ( 1 )) in if forall (v: head(f (v)) = d)
                             then d :: (max-fun(v: tail(f (v))))
                             else max-real (max-fun (v: f (0 :: v));
                                              max-fun (v: f (1 :: v)) )

                           Fig.2. Maximum-value algorithm

Lemma 1. [ max-real] is real-total with: [ max-real
                                             ^ ] (x; y) = max(x; y) More-
                   1
over, for all ; 2 3 , j[ max-real] ( ; )j  min(j j; j j).
Observe that the lemma includes the intensional information that max-real only
examines n digits of the input streams in order to produce n digits of output.
This is crucial in the proof of the proposition below, which states the correctness
of max-fun.
Proposition 4. For any real-total , it holds that [ max-fun] () 2 3! and
                     q([ max-fun] ()) = maxf~(x) j 0  x  1g:
    To prove Proposition 4, we prove, by induction on n 2 N, that, for all real-
total  : 31 ! 31 , it holds that [ max-fun] ()dn = d1 : : :dn 2 3n such that:
                                              Xn
                   j maxf~(x) j 0  x  1g ? di:2?i j  2?n                    (1)
                                                  i=1
   The base case, n = 0, is trivial. When n > 0, consider h() : 21 ! 3? de ned
by h()( ) = hd(( )). Because  is real-total, we have that h() is total. The
required inequality (1) is now proved by an inner induction on emc(h()).
   Brie y, if emc(h()) = 0 then (1) is proved using the outer induction hy-
pothesis on n and the general equality, valid for any continuous f : I! I:
            maxff(x) + c j 0  x  1g = maxff(x) j 0  x  1g + c:          (2)
When emc(h()) > 0 then (1) is proved using the induction hypothesis on the
extensional modulus of continuity (the intensional information of Lemma 1 is
needed) together with the general equality, valid for any continuous f : I! I:
        maxff(x) j 0  x  1g = max( maxff(x=2) j 0  x  1g;               (3)
                                       maxff((x + 1)=2) j 0  x  1g ):
5.2 Integration
Integration can be performed by much the same method. Observe that integra-
tion enjoys the following equalities, for any continuous f : I! I:
            Z1                Z1
                f(x) + c dx = f(x) dx + c
             0
                Z1            Z0 1               Z1
                     f(x) dx = f(x=2) dx  f((x + 1)=2) dx;
                  0              0                  0

where  : I I ! I computes the average of two reals. The above equations
are wholly analogous to (2) and (3) for maximum. Indeed we shall obtain an
integration algorithm by replacing the binary max-real used in max-fun with
a function computing the average of two reals. However, the translation is not
completely straightforward. Recall that the intensional information of Lemma 1
was crucial to the proof of Proposition 4. This contrasts with the easy:
Proposition 5. There is no real-total  : 31 ! 31 such that, for all x; y 2 I,
~(x; y) = x  y and, for all ; 2 21 , j( ; )j  min(j j; j j).
    The observed problem is a quirk of the particular representation of real num-
bers we are using. A neat way of solving it is to use a second representation.
Recall that the set of dyadic rationals is Qd = fm=2n j m; n 2 Zg. We write D for
the set Qd \ [?1; 1], which we call the set of dyadic digits. WePconsider an in nite
sequence 2 D ! as representing the real number q0 ( ) = 1         i=0 (i)  2?(i+1) .
                                      0
This de nes a surjective function q : D ! [?1; 1] extending q : 3 ! [?1; 1].
                                          !                           !
    In order to write algorithms working with dyadic digits we assume an im-
plemented datatype dyadic of dyadic digits, complete with the associated oper-
ations for the basic arithmetic operations on dyadic rationals. Then we simply
de ne a new datatype for the interval [?1; 1] in terms of dyadic streams:
  type q-interval = dyadic stream
Semantically we assume that [ dyadic] = D ? , so [ q-interval] = D 1 . The
notions of a function  : D 1 ! D 1 being total and real-total are de ned entirely
analogously to the cases for 31 .
    The full algorithm for integration is presented in Fig. 3. For convenience we
assume that three is a subtype of dyadic and (hence) interval is a subtype
of q-interval.
coerce: q-interval         !
                           interval
coerce (qd1 :: qd2 :: qr) =
               
 let qc = (2 qd1 ) + qd2 in case          qc < ?1   then    ?1::coerce((qc + 2) :: qr)
                                          qc > 1    then     1::coerce((qc ? 2) :: qr)
                                          otherwise then     0::coerce(qc :: qr)
q-avg: q-interval        q-interval      !  q-interval
q-avg (qd1 :: qr1 ; qd2 :: qr2 ) = (qd1 + qd2 )=2 :: q-avg (qr1 ; qr2 )

q-int: (interval     !
                    interval)
                                    ?!!
                                    q-interval
q-int (f ) = let d = head (f ( 1 )) in if forall (v: head(f (v)) = d)
                                         then d :: (q-int(v: tail(f (v))))
                                         else q-avg ( q-int (v: f (0 :: v)),
                                                        q-int (v: f (1 :: v)) )

integrate: (interval       !
                        interval)             ! interval
integrate (f ) = coerce (q-int(f ))

                               Fig. 3. Integration algorithm

Lemma 2.
1. For any 2 D ! , it holds that [ coerce] ( ) 2 3! and q([ coerce] ( )) = q0 ( ).
2. The function [ q-avg] : D 1 ! D 1 is real-total with [ q-avg
                                                          ^ ] (x; y) = x  y.
   Moreover, for all ; 2 D , j[ q-avg] ( ; )j  min(j j; j 0j).
                        0     1                0
Proposition 6. For any real-total , it holds that [ integrate] () 2 3! and
                                                    Z1
                           q([ integrate] ()) =          ~(x) dx:
                                                      0

The proof structure closely follows that of Proposition 4.

6 Further Developments
In the full version of the paper an extension of the integration algorithm will
be presented that integrates, over any closed interval, functions de ned from
the interval to the whole real line. This makes use of the mantissa-exponent
representation of the real line mentioned brie y in Sec. 3.
    The algorithms in this extended abstract were implemented by Reinhold
Heckmann in Gofer in summer 1997. The extensions to functions from an ar-
bitrary closed interval to the full real line have recently been implemented in
Haskell by David Plume. The integration algorithm performs abysmally on any
interesting functions. The maximum algorithm performs a little better. A partial
quantitative analysis of this situation will appear in the full version of the paper.
The intrinsic intractibility of the operations of integration and nding maximum
values is to be expected from the work of Ko [13].
Acknowledgements
I have bene ted from discussions with Pietro Di Gianantonio, Gordon Plotkin
and, especially, Martn Escardo. I thank Ieke Moerdijk, Jaap van Oosten and
Harold Schellinx for their hospitality in Utrecht, where the paper was written
with nancial support from an NWO Pionier Project.

References
 1. J.-C. Bajard, D. Michelucci, J.-M. Moreau, and J.-M. Muller. Introduction to
    special issue: \Real Numbers and Computers". Journal of Universal Computer
    Science, 1(7):436{438, 1995.
 2. U. Berger. Totale Objecte und Mengen in Bereichstheorie. PhD Thesis, University
    of Munich, 1990.
 3. U. Berger. Total objects and sets in domain theory. Journal of Pure and Applied
    Logic, 60:91{117, 1993.
 4. H.J. Boehm and R. Cartwright. Exact real arithmetic: Formulating real numbers
    as functions. In D. Turner, editor, Research Topics in Functional Programming,
    pages 43{64. Adison-Wesley, 1990.
 5. H.J. Boehm, R. Cartwright, M. Riggle, and M.J. O'Donnel. Exact real arithmetic:
    a case study in higher order programming. In ACM Symposium on LISP and
    Functional Programming, 1986.
 6. P. Di Gianantonio. A Functional Approach to Computability on Real Numbers.
    PhD Thesis, University of Pisa, 1993.
 7. P. Di Gianantonio. An abstract data type for real numbers. In Proceedings of
    ICALP-97, pages 121{131. Springer LNCS 1256, 1997.
 8. A. Edalat and M.H. Escardo. Integration in Real PCF. Information and Compu-
    tation, To appear, 1998.
 9. A. Edalat and P.J. Potts. Exact Real Computer Arithmetic. Presented at workshop:
    New Paradigms for Computation on Classical Spaces, Birmingham, 1997.
10. M.H. Escardo. PCF extended with real numbers. Theoretical Computer Science,
    162(1):79{115, 1996.
11. M.H. Escardo. Properly injective spaces and function spaces. Topology and its
    Applications, To appear, 1998.
12. C.A. Gunter. Semantics of Programming. MIT Press, 1992.
13. Ker-I Ko. Complexity Theory of Real Functions. Birkhauser, Boston, 1991.
14. V. Menissier-Morain. Arbitrary precision real arithmetic: Design and algorithms.
    Journal of Symbolic Computation, Submitted, 1996.
15. G.D. Plotkin. LCF considered as a programming language. Theoretical Computer
    Science, 5(1):223{255, 1977.
16. G.D. Plotkin. Full abstraction, totality and PCF. Math. Struct. in Comp. Sci., To
    appear, 1998.
17. J. Vuillemin. Exact real arithmetic with continued fractions. IEEE Transactions
    on Computers, 39(8):1087{1105, 1990.
